The following is a conversation with Stephen Wolfram his third time on the podcast he's a computer scientist mathematician theoretical physicist.
And the founder of Wolfram research a company behind Mathematica Wolfram Alpha Wolfram language and the new Wolfram physics.
This conversation is a wild technical roller coaster ride.
The topics of complexity mathematics physics Computing and Consciousness I urge you to come along for this wild ride and hold on.
Like the title and the lyrics of the beautiful Tom Waits song says hold on.
I think this is what this podcast is becoming a wild ride some episodes are about physics some about robots some are about war and power some are about the human condition and our search for meaning,
and some are just what the comedian Tim Dylan calls fun.
And now a quick few seconds summary of the sponsors check them out in the description as the best way to support this podcast first is Roca my favorite sunglasses and prescription glasses second is fight camp
a punching bag I use at home for boxing workout third is on it
and nutrition supplement and Fitness Company fourth is indeed a hiring website and fifth is fun dries a platform for investing in private real estate so the choices sunglasses boxing nutrition,
hiring or wealth she's wise in my friends and now on to the full ad reads as always no as in the middle
I do try to make these interesting but if you skip them please do check out the sponsors in the description I enjoy their stuff maybe you will too.
This show is brought to you by Roka
the makers of glasses and sunglasses that I love wearing for their design feel and Innovation on material Optics and grip Roca was started by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and it was born out of an obsession with performance,
I say all that because it's always nice to know there's great human beings behind the product and this is one heck of a well-engineered product
is designed to be active in it's extremely lightweight the grip is comfortable but strong in the style is classy minimalist and classy just how I like it so it holds up in all conditions when I'm wearing a suit
or when I'm wearing running gear including on long runs in 100-degree Austin weather luckily the Summer's over so we're not hitting hundred degrees like we used to.
Check out Roca for both prescription glasses and sunglasses at Roca.com and enter complex to save 20% off your first order that's the rock of that calm and enter code Lex.
This shows also brought to you by a new sponsor called fight Camp it's a free-standing punching bag I use and you can use as well at home to get a great boxing workout in
hitting this bag is one of my favorite high intensity full body workouts
when I first heard about fight Camp one of my concern was if I hit this thing hard and fast and often is it going to move a lot I'm here to report that the thing doesn't move
they have a separate part that goes on the floor the bag moves when you hit it so it gives you a great response but it doesn't sort of Hop
on the floor as you would expect so I can hit it as hard as I want it stays in one place gives me an amazing workout
I love it if I came use this new tech that tracks each punch you throw to measure speed volume and output so you can follow your progress push yourself to compete on the community leader board and challenge others or
do you versus you on the new versus mode you can pay for your fight Camp over 24 months for less than the cost of a boxing gym and get it right away plus if I can't offers free shipping with a 30 day money back guarantee
to get a free shipping at fight Camp go to join ficam.com Lex that's join fight Camp.com Lex.
This episode is also brought to you by on it nutrition supplement and fitness company they make Alpha Brain,
maybe you've heard of it it's nootropic that helps support memory mental speed and focus I don't take it every day I take it when I have a particularly,
difficult
deep work session when I have a session that I know is going to be two three four hours I'm going to have to go deep have to figure out a difficult problem this serves as a kind of boost as a catalyst as a launching pad
for the rocket of the mind I take it when I just need to clear the mind maintain focus on a difficult problem and it really does help me.
Like I said I don't necessarily want to get psychologically dependent on it so I don't use it every day but I use it quite often.
Because I actually have more and more of these deep work sessions
the require solving a particularly difficult problem anyway go to Lex Friedman.com on it to get up to 10% off Alpha Brain that's Lex Friedman.com on it.
This show is also brought to you by indeed a hiring website.
I've used them as part of many hiring efforts of done for the team's of lead in the past they have tools like candied instant match giving you quality candidates
whose resumes and indeed fit your job description immediately in fact I've used it a few times already in the past couple of months as I'm hiring a bunch of folks in different disciplines to help me on this sort of side Hobby
that we're doing with this podcast so I'm,
looking for video editors I've talked to a bunch of incredible creative people on that front I'm also looking for virtual assistant a robotics engineer to help me with some of the robotics projects
hiring a bunch of skilled passionate creative minds is a really difficult and so getting the right set of candidates is the first step and arguably the hardest step indeed is a good tool that can help you with that
task
anyway right now you get a free $75 sponsor job credit to upgrade your job post and indeed.com / Lex get it at indeed.com lat.
Offers valid through December 31st terms and conditions apply go to indeed.com / Flex.
Finally this episode is also brought to you by fund rise.
Spelled Fu and dri SE it's a platform that allows you to invest in private real estate.
If you're looking to diversify your Investment Portfolio this is a good choice I know it might sound like old school advice
but I think with investment diversification is still super super powerful in this age of cryptocurrency and all kinds of investment tools
it might be tempting to invest everything into one place I still believe in diversification not just
would then a particular set of investment tools but across and I think private real estate is a super interesting place to diversify into,
and of course it's nice to have a service like fund rise that makes that super easy reliable easy to monitor things easy too,
learn more about it like I said you have to use the best tool for the job so check out fun to rise at fun to rise.com Lex
150,000 investors use it it takes just a few minutes to get started so go to fund rise.com Lex that's fund rise.com Flex.
This is the Luxe Friedman podcast and here is my conversation with Stephen Wolfram.
Music.
Almost 20 years ago you published A New Kind of Science where you presented a study of complexity and an approach for modeling of complex systems so.
Let Us return again to the core idea of complexity what is complexity.
I don't know I think that's not the most interesting question it's like you know if you ask a biologist what is life yeah that's not the question they care the most about.
What I was interested in is how does.
Something that we would usually identifies complexity arise in nature and I got interested in that question like 50 years ago which is really embarrassingly long time ago and you know I was.
You know how does snowflakes got to have complicated forms how the galaxies get to have complicated shapes how does you know how to living systems get produced things like that and the question is what's the sort of underlying scientific basis for those kinds of things.
And.
The thing that I was at first very surprised because I've been in doing physics and particle physics some fancy mathematical physics and so on it's like I know all this fancy stuff I should be able to solve this sort of basic science question.
And I couldn't this was Blake
early maybe 1980s time frame and it's like okay what can one do to understand the sort of basic secret that nature seems to have because seems like nature you look around in the natural world that's full of incredibly complicated forms.
You look at.
Sort of most engineered kinds of things for instance they tend to be you know we got some sort of circles and lines and things like this the question is what secret does nature have that lets it make all this complexity,
that we in doing engineering for example don't naturally seem to have and so that was the kind of the thing that I got interested in.
And then the question was you know could I understand that with things like mathematical physics well didn't work very well.
So then I got to thinking about okay is there some other way to try to understand this and then the question was if you're going to look at some system in nature how do you make a model for that system for what that system does.
So you know model is some abstract representation of the system some formal representation system what are the what is the raw material that you can make that model out of
and so what I realized was well actually programs are really good.
Source of raw material for making models of things and you know in terms of my personal history the to me that seemed really obvious and the reason it seems really obvious is that because I just spent several years building.
Big piece of software that was sort of a predecessor to mathematical most language then go that's MP symbolic manipulation program which was something that had this idea of starting from.
These computational Primitives and building up everything one had to build up and so kind of the notion of well let's just try and make models by starting from computational Primitives and seeing what we can build up.
That seemed like a totally obvious thing to do in in retrospect
it might not have been externally quite so obvious but it was obvious to me at the time given the path that I happened to have been on so you know so that got me into this question of let's use programs
to model what happens in nature.
And the question then is what what kind of programs and you know we're used to programs that you write for some particular purpose and two big long piece of code and it does some specific thing.
What I got interested in was okay if you just go out into the sort of computational Universe of possible programs you say take the simplest program you can imagine what does it do.
And so I started studying these things called cellular automata actually didn't know at first they were called cellular automata but I found that out subsequently but it's just a line of cells you know each one is Black or White and it's just some rule that says
the color of this cell is determined by the color that had on previous step and its two Neighbours on previous step and I had initially thought.
That's you know sufficiently simple setup.
It's not going to do anything interesting it's always going to be simple no complexity simple rules simple Behavior okay but then I actually ran the computer experiment which is pretty easy to do I mean it probably took a few hours originally and
the and the results were not what I expected at all.
Now needless to say in the way that science actually works the results I got a lot of unexpected things which I thought was really interesting but the really strongest result
which was already right there in the print outside made I didn't really understand for a couple more years so it was it was not you know the compressed version of the story is you run the experiment and you immediately see what's going on but
I wasn't smart enough to do that so to speak but the big the big thing is,
even with very simple rules of that type sort of the minimal tiniest program sort of the the one-line program or something it's possible to get
very complicated behavior my favorite example is the single rule 30 which is a particular cellular automaton rule you just started off from one black cell and it makes this really complicated pattern.
And so that for me was sort of a critical discovery that then kind of said.
Playing back onto you know how does nature make complexity.
I sort of realized that might be how it does it that might be kind of the secret that it's using is that in this kind of computational Universe of possible programs it's actually pretty easy to get programs where even though the program is simple.
The behavior when you run the program is not simple at all and that was so for me that was the kind of the story of kind of
how that that was sort of the indication that one who got an idea of what the sort of secret that nature uses to make complexity and that complexity how complexity can be made in other places now if you say what is complexity
you know its complexity is it's not easy to tell what's going on that's the informal version of,
what is complexity but there is something going on but it's a rule you know what right well know the rules can generate just randomness.
Right now that's not obvious.
In other words it's not all those that is not obvious at all and it wasn't what I expected it's not what people's intuition had been and husband for you know for a long time that is one might think you have a rule.
You can tell.
There's a rule behind it I mean it's just like you know the early you know robots in science fiction movies but you can tell it's a robot cause it does simple things.
It runs out that isn't actually the right story
but it's not obvious that isn't the right story because people assume simple rules simple behavior and that the sort of the key discovery about the computational universe is that isn't true
and that Discovery goes very deep and relates to all kinds of things that I've spent years and years studying but you know that in the end the sort of the
the water's complexity is well you can't easily tell what it's going to do you could just run the rule and see what happens but you can't just say oh,
you know show me the rule great I know what's going to happen.
And you know the key phenomenon around that is this thing I call computational irreducibility this fact that in the something like rule 30 you might say well what's it going to do after a million steps.
Well you can run this for a million steps and just do what it does to find out but you can't compress that you can't reduce that.
And say I'm going to be able to jump ahead and say
is what's going to do after million steps but I don't have to go through anything like that computational effort by the way has anybody succeeded that you had a challenge a competition right for predicting the middle column of rule 30 anybody need anybody a number of people have sent things in and sort of people are picking away at it but it's hard
I mean it's I've been I've been actually even proving that the center column of rule 30 doesn't repeat,
that's something I think might be doable okay mathematically proven yes and so that's analogous to a similar kind of things like the digits of pi
which are also generated in this very deterministic way and so a question is how random of the digits of pi for example does every first of all the digits of pi ever repeat or we know they don't because was proved in the 1800's that Pi is not a rational number
so that means only rational numbers have digit sequences that repeat so we know the digits of pi don't repeat so now the question is does you know 0 1 2 3 or whatever through all the digits base 10 or base two or however you work it out do they all occur with equal frequency
nobody knows that's far away from what can be understood mathematically at this point and that's
that's kind of but I'm even looking for Step 1 which is proved that the the center column doesn't repeat.
And then prove other things about it like equal distribution of equal numbers of zeros and ones and those are things which I you know I kind of set up this little little
prize thing because I thought those were not not too out of range those are things which are within.
You know a modest amount of time it's conceivable that those could be done they're not they're not far away from what current mathematics might allow they'll require a bunch of cleverness and hopefully some interesting new ideas that you know will be useful other places.
But you start in 1980 with this idea before I think you realized you know this idea of programs.
It is thought that there might be some kind of thermodynamic like Randomness and then complexity comes from a clever filter.
That you kind of like I don't know spaghetti or something you you filter the randomness and outcomes complexity which is an interesting intuition.
How do we know that's not actually what's happening so just because you write were then able to develop look you don't need this like.
Incredible Randomness you can just have very simple predictable initial conditions and predictable rules and if from that emerge complexity.
Still there might be some systems where it's filtering Randomness yeah the inputs well the point is.
When you have quotes Randomness than the input that means there's all kinds of information in the input yeah and in a sense what you get out will be maybe just.
Something close to what you put in like people are very in dynamical systems theory so the big error mathematics that developed
from the early 1900's and really got big in the 1980s you know an example of what people study their lot and its popular version is chaos theory and example what people study a lot
is the shift map which is basically taking 2X.
Mod 12 at the fractional part of 2x which is basically just taking digits and binary and shifting them to the left so at every step,
you got to see if you say how big is this number that I got out well the most important digit in that number is whatever ended up at the at the left-hand end but now if you start off from an arbitrary random number.
Which is quotes randomly chosen so all its digits are random then when you run that sort of Chaos Theory shift map.
All that you got out is just whatever you put in
you just get to see what you what it's not obvious that you would excavate all of those digits and if you're for example making a theory I don't know fluid Mechanics for example if there was that phenomenon in fluid mechanics then the equations of fluid mechanics can't be right.
Because what that will be saying is the equations of that that it matters to the fluid what happens in the fluid at the level of the you know millionth digit.
Of the initial conditions,
Which is far below the points at which you're hitting kind of sizes of molecules and things like that so it's kind of almost explaining if that phenomenon is an important thing
it's kind of telling you that the fluid dynamics which describes fluids as continuous media and so on isn't isn't really right but so you know so this idea that.
You know there's there's it's a tricky thing because as soon as you put Randomness in you have to no you know what how much of what's coming out is what you put in
versus how much is actually something that's being generated and what's really nice about these systems where you just have very simple initial conditions
I'm where you get random stuff out or seemingly random stuff out is you don't have that issue you don't have to argue about was that something complicated put in.
Because plainly obvious there wasn't now as a practical matter in doing experiments the big thing is if the thing you see is complex and reproducible.
Then it didn't come from just filtering some quotes Randomness from the outside world.
It has to be something that is intrinsically made because it wouldn't otherwise be I mean you know the.
It could be the case that you set things up and it's always the same each time and you say well it's kind of,
the same but it's not then it's not randomly each time because it's kind of the definition of it being random is it was kind of picked picked at random each time so to speak,
so is it possible to for sure know that our universe does not at the fundamental
level have Randomness is it possible to conclusively say there's no Randomness at the bottom
well it's an interesting question I mean you know
science Natural Sciences an inductive business right You observe a bunch of things and you say can we fit these together what is our hypothesis for what's going on the thing that I think I can say fairly definitively
is this point we understand enough about fundamental physics that there is if.
There was sort of an extra dice being thrown it's something that doesn't need to be there we can get what we see without that.
Now you know could you add that in as an extra little feature roid you know without breaking the universe.
Probably but in fact almost certainly yes.
But is it necessary for understanding Universe know and I think actually from a more fundamental point of view it's.
It's I think I might be able to argue so one of the things that I've been interested in a pretty surprised that I've had anything sent in to say about is the question of why does the universe exist
I didn't think that was a question that I would you know
I thought that was a far out their metaphysical kind of thing even the Philosopher's of stayed away from that question for the most part,
it's so such a kind of you know difficult to address question but I actually think to my great surprise that from a physics project and so on
but it is possible to actually address that question and explain why the universe exists and I kind of have a suspicion I've not thought it through I kind of have a suspicion that that explanation will eventually show you that.
In no meaningful sense can there be Randomness underneath universe that is that if there is.
It's something that is necessarily irrelevant to our perception of the universe that is that it could be there but doesn't matter.
Because in a sense we've already you know whatever it would do whatever extra thing it would add is not relevant to our perception of what's going on so why.
Does the universe exist how does the irrelevance of Randomness connect to the big why question of so verse okay so I mean why does the universe exist well let's see and is this the only Universe we got.
It's the only one.
That about that I'm pretty sure so now maybe which one which of these topics is better to enter first why does the universe exists and why you think it's the only one that exists.
Well I think they're very closely related okay okay so I mean the first thing let's see I mean this why does the universe exist question.
Is built on top of all these things that we've been figuring out about fundamental physics because if you want to know why the universe exists you kind of have to know what the universe is made of and I think
the well let me let me describe a little bit about
the why does the universe exist question so the main issue is let's say you have a model for the universe and you say I've got this.
Program or something and you run it and you make the universe.
Now you say well how do you actually why is that program actually running and people say you've got this program that makes the universe what computer is it running on.
What does it mean what actualize has something you know two plus two equals four but that's different from saying this to a pile of to rocks and other part of two rocks and some of them moves them together and makes for so to speak
and so what is it that kind of turns it from being just this formal thing to being something that is actualized
okay so that we have to start thinking about well well what do we actually know about what's going on in the universe well we are observers of this universe.
But confusingly enough with part of this universe so in a sense
we what what what if we say what do we what do we know about what's going on in the universe well what we know is what sort of our Consciousness records about what's going on in the universe and so Consciousness is part of the fabric of the universe so we're in it,
yes we're in it and and maybe I should maybe I should start off by saying something about.
The Consciousness story because that that's some uh maybe we should begin.
Even before that at the very base layer of the Wolfram physics project maybe you can give a broad overview once again.
Really quick about this hypergraph model yes and also
what is it a year and a half ago since you've brought this project to the world what is the status update where what are all the beautiful ideas you have come across what are the interesting things you can do it mentioned its,
I mean it's a it's a freaking Cambrian explosion I mean it's it's crazy I mean they're all these things which I've kind of wondered about for years
and suddenly there's actually way to think about them and I really did not see I mean the real strength of what's happened I absolutely did not see coming
and the real strength of it is we've got this model for physics but it turns out it's a foundational kind of model that's a different kind of computation like model that I'm kind of calling the sort of multi computational model and
that's that kind of model is applicable not only to physics but also to lots of other kinds of things,
and one reason that's extremely powerful is because physics has been very successful so we know a lot.
Based on what we figured out in physics and if we know that the same model governs physics and governs I don't know economics Linguistics Immunology whatever.
We know that the same kind of model governs those things we can start using things that we've successfully discovered in physics and applying those intuitions and all these other areas.
And that's that's pretty exciting and very surprising to me and in fact it's kind of like in the original story of,
sort of you go and you explain why is that complexity in the natural world then you realize well there's all this complexity there's all this computational irreducibility
you know there's a lot we can't know about what's going to happen it's kind of kind of very confusing thing for people who say you know science is nailed everything down we're going to you know based on science we can know everything well actually there's this computational irreducibility thing right in the middle of that.
Throwing up by science so to speak and then the question is well given computational irreducibility.
How can we actually figure out anything about what happens in the world why aren't we why are we able to predict anything why are we able to operate in the world.
And the answer is that we sort of live in these slices of computational reusability that exist in this kind of ocean of computational irreducibility.
And it turns out that seems that it's a very fundamental feature of the kind of model that seems to operate in physics.
And perhaps in the lab all of these other areas that there are these particular slices of computational reducibility that are relevant to us and.
Those are the things that both allow us to operate in the world and not just have everything be completely unpredictable but they're also things that potentially give us what amount to sort of physics like laws in all these other areas,
so that's that's been sort of an exciting thing but but I would say that in general for our project.
It's been going spectacularly well I mean I you know I it's very honestly it wasn't something I expected to happen in my lifetime I mean it's you know it's something where where it's it's an in fact.
One of the things about it some of the things that we've discovered are things where I was pretty sure that wasn't how things worked and turns out I'm wrong.
You know I've been a major area in metamathematics I'd be realizing that I've something I've long believed we can talk about it later that that just just really isn't right but I think that.
The the thing that so what's happened with the physics project I mean you know it's a can explain a little bit about how the how the model works but basically working maybe ask you the following question so.
It's easy through words describe how cellular am Works you've explained this
and it's the fundamental mechanism by which you in your book and you kind of science explored the idea of complexity and how to do science in this world of
I'll reducible islands and irreducible general irreducibility okay so how does the model of
hypergraphs differ from cellular automata and how does they deal multi computation.
Different like maybe that's a way to describe it we're right this is a you know
my life is like all of our Lives something of a story of computational irreducibility yes and you know it's been going for a few years now so it's always a challenge to kind of find these appropriate pockets of reduced ability but let me see what I can do so
so I mean first of all let's talk about physics first of all and you know a key observation.
The one of the starting point of our physics project is things about what is space what is the universe made of.
And you know ever since Euclid people just sort of say space is just this thing where you can put things at any position you want
and they're just points and they just geometrical things that you can just arbitrarily put it different different coordinate positions so does the first thing in our physics project is the idea that space is made of something.
Just like water is made of molecules space is made of kind of atoms of space.
And the only thing we can say about these atoms of space says they have some identity there's a there's a there is it's this Adam as opposed to this Adam.
And you know you could give them a few a computer person you give them uuids or something damn it yes and but that's all there is to say about them say yes speak um and then.
All we know about these atoms of space is how they relate to each other so we say these three atoms of space are
associated with each other in some relation so you can think about that as you know what Adam of spaces friends with what other atom of space you can build this essentially friend network of the atoms of space
and
the sort of starting point of our physics project is that's what I universe is it's a giant friend network of the atoms of space and so how can that possibly represent our universe well it's like
in something like water you know their molecules bouncing around but on a large scale
that you know that produces fluid flow and we have fluid vortices and we have all of these phenomena that are sort of the emergent phenomena from that underlying,
kind of collection of molecules bouncing around and by the way it's important that collection of molecules bouncing around have this phenomenon of computational irreducibility that's actually what leads to the second law of Thermodynamics among other things and that
leads to the sort of randomness of the underlying Behavior
which is what gives you something which on a large scale seems like it's a smooth continuous type of thing and so so okay so first thing is space is made of something it's made of
all these atoms of space connected together in this network and then everything that we experience.
Is sort of features of the of that structure of space so you know when we have an electron or something or a photon it's some kind of tangle
and the structure of space much like kind of a Vortex and a fluid.
Would be just this thing that is you know it can actually be the vortex can move around it can involve different molecules in the fluid
but the vortex still stays there and this is Ahmad enough The Vortex looks like an atom itself like a basic column yes so there's the levels of abstraction
if you squint as kind of blur things out it looks like at every level of abstraction you can Define what is a basic.
Individual entity yes but you know in this model.
There's a bottom level yeah you know there's an elementary length maybe that sends us a hundred ten to the minus 100 meters let's say which is really small you know proton is 10 to the minus 15 meters the smallest we've ever been able to sort of
see where the particle accelerator is our intent of - 21 meters so you know if,
we don't know precisely what the correct scale is but it's perhaps of the order of 10 to the minus 100 meters so it's pretty small and but that's that's the end that's that's what things are made of what's your intuition where the 10 to the minus 100 comes from.
What's your intuition about the scale well okay so there's a calculation which I consider to be somewhat rickety.
Okay which has to do with comparing so so there are various fundamental constants there's a speed of light the speed of light once you know the elementary time.
The speed of light is tells you the conversion from the elementary time to the elementary length then there's the question of how do you convert to the elementary energy.
And how do you convert to between other things and their various constants we know we know the speed of light we know the gravitational constant we know Planck's Constant and quantum mechanics those are the three important ones and
we actually know some other things we know things like the size of the universe the Hubble constant things like that and essentially this calculation of the elementary length.
Comes from looking at these sort of combination of those okay so the most obvious thing people have sort of assumed that quantum gravity happens at this thing the Planck scale to the minus 34 meters.
Which is the sort of the combination of Planck's Constant and the gravitational constant speed of light that gives you that kind of length turns out in our model there is an additional parameter.
Which is essentially the number of simultaneous threads of execution of the universe which is essentially the number of sort of independent Quantum processes that are going on.
And that number see if I remember that number that number is 10 to the 170 I think in and so it's a big number but that number.
Then connects you know sort of modifies what you might think from all these plank.
Units to give you the things with giving and that there's been sort of a mystery actually in the in the is more technical physics thing that the Planck Mass the Planck energy.
Planck energy is actually surprisingly big
the Planck length is Tiny it undermines 34 meters that you know Planck time to the minus 43 M I think that seconds I think but the Planck energy is like is like the the energy of a lightning strike.
Okay which is pretty weird and our models.
The actual Elementary energy is that divided by the number of simultaneous Quantum threads and it ends up being really small to and that sort of explains that mystery that's been around for a while about about how Planck units work.
But that you know whether that.
Precise estimate is right we don't know yet I mean that that that's one of the things that sort of been a thing we've been pretty interested in is how do you see through you know how does you how do you make a gravitational microscope that can kind of see through to the atoms of space.
How do you get in in fluid flow for example if you go to Hypersonic flow or something you know you've got a mock 20 you know space plane or something
it really matters that there are individual molecules,
hitting the space plane not a continuous fluid the question is what is the analogous kind of what is the analog of hypersonic flow,
for for our first things about the structure of space-time and it looks like a
a rapidly rotating black hole right at this sort of critical rotation rate is it looks as if that's a case where essentially the the structure of space-time is just about to fall apart.
And you may be able to kind of see the evidence of sort of discrete elements you know you may be able to kind of see there
these sort of gravitational microscope of actually seeing these discrete elements of space and there may be some effect in for example gravitational waves produced by rapidly rotating black hole
that in which one could actually see some phenomenon where one can say yes these don't come out the way one would expect based on having a continuous structure of space-time.
They do is it something where you can kind of see through to the discrete structure.
We don't know that yet so you maybe elaborate a little bit deeper how a microscope they can see to 10 to the minus 100 how rotating black holes.
And presumably the the detailed accurate detection of gravitational waves from such black holes can reveal the discreteness of space.
Okay first thing is what is a black hole
actually we need to go a little bit further in the story of what space-time is because I explain a little bit about what space is but it didn't talk about what time is and that's sort of important in understanding space-time so it's been and your senses both space and time in this story are discrete absolutely.
Absolutely but it's a complicated story yes and needless to say or simple at the bottom.
It's very simple at the bottom it's very in the end,
it's simple but deeply abstract and on something that is simple and conception but kind of wrapping one's head around what's going on is
pretty hard but so so first of all we have this so now I've described this kind of atoms of space in their connections you can think about these things as a hyper graph you know a graph is just you connect nodes to nodes but a hyper graph you can have you know
you can have sort of not just friends individual friends to friends but you can have these Triplets of friends or whatever else it's some
and so we just saying that that's just the relations between atoms of space
all the hyper edges of the hypergraph and so we got some big collection of these atoms of space maybe ten to the four hundred or something in our in our universe and that's the structure of space that's an every feature
of what we experience and the world is a feature of that
that hypergraph that special hypergraph so then the question is well how does what does that special hypergraph do well the idea is that there are rules.
That update that special hypergraph and you know in a cellular automaton you've just got this line of cells and you just say it every step
every time step you got fixed time steps fixed array of cells at every step every cell gets updated according to a certain Rule and that's that's kind of the that's the way it works now in this hyper graph it's
sort of vaguely the same kind of thing we say every time you see a little piece of hyper graph that looks like this.
Update it to one that looks like this so it's just keep rewriting the type of graph every time you see something looks like that anywhere in the universe it gets Rewritten.
Now one thing that's tricky about that which will come to us that's multi computational idea which has to do with you're not saying in some kind of lockstep way do this one then this one then this one it's just whenever you see one you can do.
You can go ahead and do it and that leads one not to have a single thread of time in the universe.
Because if you knew which one to do you just say okay we do this one then we do this one then we do this one but if you say just do whichever one you feel like.
You end up with these multiple threads of time this kind of multiple histories of the universe depending on which order you happen to do the things you could do in so it's fundamentally a synchronous and parallel.
Yes yes which is very uncomfortable for the human brain that seeks for things to be sequential yeah and synchronous.
Well I think that this is this is part of the story of Consciousness as I think,
the key aspect of Consciousness that is important for sort of parsing the universe is this point that we have a single thread of experience
we have a memory of what happened in the past we can say something predict something about the future but there's a single thread of experience and it's not obvious it should work that way I mean we've got a hundred billion neurons in our brains and they're all firing and all kinds of different ways but yet.
Our experiences that there is the single thread of time that that goes that goes along and I think that.
You know one of the things I've kind of realized with a lot more clarity in the last year is the fact that our the fact that we conclude that the Universe has the laws it has.
As a consequence of the fact that we have Consciousness the way we have Consciousness and so the fact so it's I mean just
to go on with kind of the the basic setup it's so we got this special hypergraph it's got all these atoms of space they're getting they're getting these little clumps of atoms of space so getting turned into other types of atoms a space that's happening everywhere in the universe all the time.
And so one thing is a little bit weird is,
there's nothing permanent in the universe the universe is getting Rewritten everywhere all the time and if it wasn't getting Rewritten it would space wouldn't be knitted together that is space would just fall apart
there wouldn't be any way in which we could say this part of space is next to this part of space you know one of the things that I was people were confused about back in Antiquity you know the ancient Greek philosophers and so honest how does motion work.
You know how can it be the case that you can take a thing that we can walk around and it's still us when we walked you know a foot forward so to speak and in a sense with our models
that's again a question
because it's a different set of atoms of space when we went you know when I move my hand it's moving into a different set of atoms of space it's having to be recreated it's not,
the thing itself is not there it's being continuously recreated all the time now it's a little bit like waves in an ocean you know vortices in a fluid which again
the actual molecules that exist in those are not what define the identity of the thing and but it's a little bit you know this idea that there can be pure motion.
That it can that it is even possible for an object to just move around in the universe and not change is it's not self-evident that such a thing should be possible.
And that is part of our perception of the universe is that we we parse those aspects of the universe where things like pure motion impossible.
Now pure motion even in general tivity the theory of gravity.
Pure motion is a little bit of a complicated thing I mean if you imagine your average you know tea cup or something approaching a black hole,
it is deformed and distorted by the structure of space-time and to say is it really pure motion is it that same teacup that's the same shape well it's a bit of a complicated story and this is a more extreme version of that.
So so anyway the thing that that's happening as we got space we've got this notion of time so time is this kind of,
this rewriting of the hypergraph and one of the things that's important about that time is this sort of computational irreducible process that something
you know time is not something
and it's kind of the mathematical view of time tends to be time is just to coordinate we can you know slider slider turn a knob and we'll change the time that we've got in this equation but in this picture of time
that's not how it works at all time is this inexorable irreducible kind of set of computations that go on that go from where we are now to the Future.
But so so the thing on one of the things that is again something once it has to break out of
is your average trained physicist like me says you know space and time of the same kind of thing they're related by you know the prank or a group and and lorentz Transformations and relativity and all these kinds of things.
And you know space and time you know they're all these kind of sort of folk stories you can tell about why space and time the same kind of thing.
In this model the fundamentally not the same kind of thing
spaces this kind of sort of connections between these atoms of space-time is this computational process so the thing that the first sort of surprising thing is well it turns out you get relativity anyway.
And the reason that happens that few bits and pieces here which one has to understand but but the fundamental point is if you are an observer embedded in the system.
That a part of this whole story of things getting updated in this way and that.
There are the sort of a limit to what you can tell about what's going on and really in the end the only thing you can tell is what are the causal relationships between events.
So an event in this sort of at the elementary event.
Is a little piece of hypergraph got Rewritten and that means a few hyper edges of the hypergraph what consumed by the event.
And you produce some other hyper edges and that's an elementary event and so then the question is what we can tell
is kind of what the network of causal relationships between Elementary events has that's the ultimate thing the causal graph of the universe and it turns out that while there's this property of causal invariance.
That is true of a bunch of these models and I think is inevitably true for a variety of reasons that
makes it be the case that it doesn't matter kind of if you are sort of saying well I've got the type of graph and I can rewrite this piece here and this piece here and I do them all in different orders,
when you construct the causal graph for each of those orders that you choose to do things in.
You'll end up with the same causal graph and so that's essentially why well that's in the end why relativity Works its why
our perception of space and time is is as having this kind of connection that relativity says they should have and that's that's kind of that's kind of how that works
I think I'm missing a little piece is if we can go there again you said the fact that the Observer is embedded in this hyper graph what's missing what is the Observer not able
the state about this universe so they sometimes look from the outside you can say oh I see this.
I see this particular place was updated and then this one was updated and I'm seeing which order things were updated in.
But the Observer embedded in the universe doesn't know which order things were updated in because until they've been updated they have no idea what else happened.
So the only thing they know is the set of causal relationships,
let me give an extreme example let's imagine that the universe is a turing machine Turing machines have just this one
update head which does something and otherwise the term machine just does nothing right and and the turing machine works by having this head move around and do its updating you know just where the head happens to be.
The question is could the universe be a turing machine could the universe just have a single updating head that just zipping around all over the place you say that's crazy because you know I'm talking to you you seem to be updating I'm updating Etc
but the thing is there's no way to know that because if there was just this head moving around it's like okay it updates me.
But you're completely Frozen at that point until the headers come over and updated you you have no idea what happened to me.
And so if you sort of unravel that argument you realized the only thing we actually can tell is what the network of causal relationships between the things that happen were,
we don't get to know from some sort of outside sort of God's eye view of the thing we don't get to know.
What sort of from the outside what happened we only get to know sort of what the set of relationships between the things that happened actually work yeah but if I somehow record like a trace of this,
I guess we'll be called multi computation can't I didn't look back.
In the way you look forward to trace some you place throughout the Universe like throughout.
Like a log that records in my own pocket of in this hypergraph can't I.
Like realizing that I'm getting outdated picture can't I record.
See the problem is and this is where things start getting very entangled in terms of what one understands the problem is that any such recording device is itself part of the universe yeah.
So you don't get to say you never got to say let's go outside the universe and go do this.
And that's why I mean lots of the features of this of this model and the way things work end up being a result of that so but why.
I guess from on a human level what is the cost you're paying what are you missing from not getting an updated picture all the time okay I got I understand what you're saying oh yeah right like what like how does Consciousness emerge from that.
How like what are the limitations to that Observer I understand you're getting a delay well that's that's okay this is this does.
Bunch of limitations of the Observer I think.
Maybe just explain something about quantum mechanics because that maybe as an extreme version of some of these issues which helps to kind of motivate why one should sort of think things through a little bit more carefully so one feature of the of this.
Okay so in standard physics like high school physics you learn you know the equations of motion for a ball.
And the the you know it says you throw the ball this angle this velocity things will move in this way and there's a definite answer.
But the story the key story of quantum mechanics is there aren't definite answers to where does the ball go there's kind of this whole sort of bundle of possible paths
and all we say we know from quantum mechanics is certain probabilities for where the ball will end up.
Okay so that's kind of the core idea of quantum mechanics so in our models,
you quantum mechanics is not some kind of plug-in add-on type thing you absolutely cannot get away from quantum mechanics because as you think about updating this hypergraph,
there isn't just one sequence of things one definite sequence of things that can happen there are all these different possible updates sequences that can occur you could do this you know piece of the hypergraph now and then this one later and etc etc etc.
All those different parts of History correspond to these Quantum quantum
pause and quantum mechanics these different possible Quantum histories and one of the things that's kind of surprising about it is they they Branch you know there can be a certain state of the universe and it could do this or it could do that
but they can also merge they can be two states of the universe which the next state.
The next state they produces the same for both of them yeah and that process of branching and merging is kind of critical on the idea that there could be merging
is critical and somewhat non-trivial for these hyper graphs because there's a whole graph isomorphism Story and there's a whole very elaborate setups for that cause 0 and variance comes in yes I'm honored among other things right yes that's but so so then what happens is.
That what what one seeing Okay so we've got this thing that's branching and merging etc etc etc okay so now the question is how do we perceive that.
What are you know how do we do we why don't we notice that the universe is branching and merging.
Why you know why is it the case that we just think a definite set of things happen well the answer is we are embedded in that universe and our brains are branching and merging two,
and so what quantum mechanics becomes a story of is how does a branching brain
the Seaver branching universe and the key thing is as soon as you say I think definite things happen in the universe that means you are essentially conflating lots of different parts of History.
You're saying actually as far as I'm concerned because I'm convinced that definite things happen in the universe all these PODS of History must be equivalent.
Now it's not obvious that that would be a consistent thing to do it might be you say all these positive history are equivalent.
By golly moments later that would be a completely inconsistent point of view everything would have you know gone to hell in different ways the fact that that doesn't happen.
Is well that's a consequence of this causal variants thing but that's and the fact that that does happen a little bit is what causes little Quantum effects and that term if that didn't happen at all there wouldn't be anything that sort of is like quantum mechanics,
it would be quantum mechanics is kind of like in this in this kind of this bundle of paths,
it's a little bit like what happens in statistical mechanics and fluid mechanics whatever that most of the time you just see this continuous fluid you just see the world just progressing in this kind of way that's like this continuous fluid but every so often if you look at the exact right experiment.
You can start seeing well actually it's made of these molecules where they might go that way or they might go this way and that's kind of quantum effects and so that's so the this kind of idea,
of
we're sort of embedded in the universe this branching brain is perceiving this branching universe and that ends up being sort of a story of quantum mechanics that's that's part of the whole picture of what's going on but I think
to come back to sort of where does conscious what is what is the story of Consciousness so in the universe.
We've got you know whatever it is 10 to the 400 items of space they're all doing this complicated things it's all a big complicated irreducible computation.
The question is what do we perceive from all of that and the answer is that we are we are parsing the universe in a particular way.
Let me again go back to the gas molecules analogy you know in the gas in this room there are molecules bouncing around all kinds of complicated patterns but we don't care.
All we notice is there's you know the gas laws are satisfied maybe there's some fluid dynamics these are kind of features,
of that assembly of molecules that we notice and then lots of details we don't notice when you say we do you mean the tools of physics that you mean literally are the human brain and it's perception system.
Well okay so the human brain is where it starts but we've built a bunch of instruments to do a bit better than human brain but they still have many of the same kinds of ideas you know their cameras and their pressure sensors and they're these kinds of things they're not
you know this point we don't know
how to make fundamentally qualitatively different sensory devices right and so it's always just an extension of the conscious experience for our sensory experience sensory experience but.
Sensory experience that somehow intricately tied to.
Consciousness right well so one question is when we are looking at all these molecules that are in the gas and there might be 10 to 20 at molecules and some little little box or something it's like what,
what do we notice about those molecules so one thing that we can say is we don't notice that much we are,
you know we are computationally bounded observers we can't go in and say okay I'm that 10 to the 23rd molecules and I know that I can sort of decrypt emotions and I can figure out this and that it's like I'm just going to say what's the average density molecules.
And so one key feature of us is that we are computationally bounded.
And that when you are looking at a universe which is full of computation and doing huge amounts of computation but we are computationally bounded.
There's only certain things about the universe that we're going to be sensitive to.
We're not going to be you know figuring out what all the atoms are spaced so doing because we're just computationally bounded observers and we are only sampling these these small set of features,
so I think the two defining features of Consciousness that and I you know I would say that the the sort of the preamble to the says for years you know as I've talked about sort of computation and fundamental features of physics and science.
People ask me so what about Consciousness and I for years I've said I've nothing to say about consciousness.
And you know I've kind of told the story you know you talk about intelligence you talk about life.
These are both features where you say what's the abstract definition of life we don't really know the abstract definition we know the one for life on Earth.
It's got our na it's got cell membranes it's got all this kind of stuff.
Similarly for intelligence we know the human definition of intelligence but what is intelligence abstract you don't really know.
And so what I've long believed is that sort of the abstract definition of intelligence is just computational sophistication.
That is that as soon as you can be computationally sophisticated that's kind of the abstract version the generalized version of intelligence so then the question is what about consciousness.
And what I sort of realized is that Consciousness is actually a step down from intelligence.
That is that you might think oh you know Consciousness is the is the is the top of the pile but actually I don't think it is,
I think that there's this notion of kind of computational sophistication which is the generalized intelligence but Consciousness has to limitations I think.
One of them is computational boundedness.
That is that we're only perceiving a sort of computational rebounded view of the universe and the other is this idea of a single thread of time.
That is that we and in fact we know neurophysiological ER brains go to some trouble to give us this one thread of attention so to speak and it isn't the case that you know in all the neurons in our brains.
That at least in our conscious note that the you know the correspondence of language in our conscious experience.
We just have the single thread of attention single thread of perception and you know maybe there's something unconscious that's bubbling around that's the kind of,
almost the quantum version of what's happening in our brain so to speak we've got the classical flow of what we are mostly thinking about so to speak,
but does this kind of bubbling around of other pods that is all those other neurons that didn't make it to be part of our sort of conscious stream of experience so in that sense intelligence as computational sophistication is much broader
then then the the computational constraints which.
Consciousness operates under and also the sequential like the sequential thing yes like the notion of time as that's kind of interesting but then the the follow-up question is like okay starting to get a sense of what is intelligence
how does that connector a human break is you're saying intelligence is almost like a fabric.
Like what we like plug into it or something like I think you know people Consciousness plugs into it yeah I mean the intelligence I think the core.
You know intelligence some level is just a word but we are asking you know what is the the notion of intelligence,
as we generalize it beyond the bounds of humans beyond the bounds of even the a is that we humans are built and so on
you know what what is intelligence you know is the weather
you know people said the weather has a mind of its own what does that mean you know can the weather be intelligent yeah what does agency have to do with intelligence here so is intelligence just like your conception of computation just intelligence.
Is a is the capacity to perform computation in a sea of yeah I think so I mean I think that's right and I think that you know this question of.
Of is it for a purpose okay that quickly degenerates into a horrible philosophical mess because you know whenever you say.
Did the weather do that for a purpose yeah,
right well yes it did it was trying to move a bunch of hot air from the equator to the poles or something that's its purpose but why because I seem to be equally as dumb today as I was yesterday so there's some persistence like consistency over time that the intelligence I plugged into
so like what's it seems like there's a hard constraint well the amount of computation I can perform in my consciousness.
Aggressively really close to Connected somehow well I think the point is that the thing that gives you kind of the ability to have kind of conscious.
Until intelligence you can have kind of this okay so so one thing is we don't know.
Intelligence is other than the ones that are very much like us yes right and ones that are very much like us I think have this feature of single thread of time bounded you know computationally bounded now that
but you also need computational sophistication having a single thread of time and being computationally bounded you could just be a clock going Tick-Tock in her that would satisfy those conditions but the fact that we have
this sort of irreducible you know computational ability.
That's that's an important feature that's that's the sort of the the Bedrock on which we can construct the things we construct now the fact that,
we have this experience of the world that has the single thread of time and computational boundedness the thing that I sort of realized is it's that that causes us.
To deduce from this irreducible mess of what's going on in the physical world the laws of physics that we think exists.
So in other words if we say why do we believe that there is you know continuous space let's say why do we believe that gravity works the way it does well in principle we could be kind of
parsing details of the universe that were you know that in okay the analogy is,
again with the statistical mechanics and molecules in a box we could be sensitive to every little detail of the swirling around of these molecules and we could say what really matters.
Is the you know the wiggle effect that is you know that is something that we humans just never noticed because it's some weird thing that happens when they're 15 collisions of,
molecules and this happens in that happens we just see the pure motion of a ball yeah moving about.
Why do we see that right and the point is that that what seems to be the case is that
the things that if we say given this sort of hyper graph that's updating and all the details about all the sort of sort of atoms and space in what they do and we say how do we slice that
to what we can be sensitive to what seems to be the case says that it as soon as we assume you know computational boundedness single thread of time that leads us to general relativity.
In other words we can't avoid that that's the way that we we will parse the universe given those constraints we parse the universe according to
those particular in such a way that we say the aggregate
reducible company sort of computation pocket of computational reducibility that we slice out of this kind of Hole computational irreducible Ocean of behavior
is just this one that corresponds to generativity yeah but we don't perceive general relativity.
Well we do if we do fancy experiments so you're saying so perceive really does mean the full drop something that's that's a great example of general relativity in action the groundhog would like what's the difference in that in Newtonian mechanics I mean why doesn't this is
when I say journal70 that's even gravity but the Uber Theory so to speak I mean you Tony and gravity is just the approximation that we can make you know on the earth and things like that so so this is you know the phenomenon of gravity,
is one that is a consequence of.
We would perceive something very different from Gravity so so the way to understand that is when we think about Okay so.
We make up reference frames with which we parse what's happening in space and time so in other words one of the one of the things that we do is we say.
As time progresses everywhere in space.
Something happens at a particular time and then we go to the next time and we say this is what space is like at the next time there's what space is like at the next time that's it's the reason we are used to doing that.
Is because you know when we look around we might see 10 100 meters away the time it takes light to travel that distance is really short.
Compared to the time it takes our brains to know what happened so as far as our brains are concerned we are parsing the universe in this
there's a moment in time it's all of space there's a moment in time it's all of space you know if we were the size of planets or something we would have a different perception because the speed of light would be much more important to us we wouldn't have this perception that,
things happen progressively in time everywhere in space and so that's an important kind of constraint.
And the reason that we kind of parse the universe in the way that causes us to say gravity works the way it does is because we're doing things like.
Deciding that we can say the universe exists space has a definite structure.
There is a moment in time space says this definite structure we move to the next moment in time space as another structure that kind of setup.
Is what lets us kind of deduce.
Kind of what parse the universe in such a way that we say gravity works the way it does so that kind of reference frame is that the illusion of that.
Is that you're saying that somehow useful for Consciousness like that's what Consciousness does because in a sense what Consciousness is doing is.
There are it's insisting that the universe is kind of sequentialized right that is
and it is not allowing the possibility that oh there are these multiple threads of time and they're all flowing differently it's like saying no you know everything is happening in this one
thread of experience that we have and that illusion of that one thread of experience cannot happen at the planetary scale.
0iu saying typical human are you saying we are at a human level especially.
Here for Consciousness like well for our kind of Consciousness it's you know if we existed at a scale close to the elementary length for example.
Then our perception of the universe will be absurdly different okay so but this makes this Consciousness seem like a weird side effect of this particular scale.
And so who cares Amy well Consciousness is not that special.
I think look I think that a very interesting question is which I've certainly thought a little bit about is
what can you imagine what is a sort of factoring of something you know what are some other possible ways you could exist so to speak write and you know if you were a photon
if you were sort of you know some kind of thing that was kind of you know
intelligence represented in terms of photons you know for example the photons we receive in the cosmic microwave background those photons as far as they're concerned the universe just started
they were admitted in 100,000 years off of the beginning of the universe they've been traveling at the speed of light.
Time stayed still for them and then they just arrived and we just detected them so for them the universe just started.
And that's a different perception of you know that has implications for a very different perception of time they don't have their single thread that seems to be really important for being able to tell a heck of a good story so we humans,
we can tell a story we write we can tell a story and we another kind of stories can you tell so photons have really boring story.
Yeah I mean so so that's it I don't know if they're boring story but I think it's,
you know I've been wondering about this and I've been asking you know friends of mine who was science fiction writers and things have you written stuff about this and I hope one example the great great question of books from my friend Rudy Rucker which were.
Which I have to say the books about that a very informed by bunch of science that I've done and the thing that I really loved about them is that you know.
And the first chapter of the book.
The Earth is consumed by these things he called Nance which are Nano Nano Bots type things and it's so you know so the Earth is gone in the first but then it.
But but but then boil alert yeah right that was a that was only a microscope is only chapter 1 okay it's some the but the thing that,
is not a real spoiler alert because it's such a complicated concept but but in the end in the end,
the Earth is saved by this thing called the principle of computational equivalence which is a kind of a core scientific idea of mine and I was just like like thrilled I don't read fiction books very often
and I was just thrilled I get to the end of this and it's like oh my gosh you know everything is saved by this sort of deep scientific principle can you give me be elaborate called the principle of computational
equivalence can save our planet.
That would that would be a terrible spoiler for me that would be a spoiler yeah but no but I let me say what the principle of computational equivalence is mmm.
So the question is you are you have a system you have some rule you can think of Its Behavior as corresponding to a computation.
The question is how sophisticated is that computation the statement of the principle of computational equivalence is as soon as it's not obviously simple,
it will be as sophisticated as anything and so that has the implication that you know rule 30 you know our brains,
other things in physics there all ultimately equivalent in the computations they can do
and that's what leads to this computational irreducibility idea because the reason we don't get to jump ahead,
you know and out think rule 30 is because we're just computationally equivalent to rule 30 so we're kind of just both just running computations.
That are the same sort of raw the same level of computation so to speak so that's kind of the idea there and the question I mean it's like the
you know in the science fiction version would be okay somebody says we just need more servers get us more servers the way to get even more servers is.
Turn the whole planet into a bunch of micro servers and that that's that's where it starts and so the question of you know computational equivalence principle of computational equivalence is well actually you don't need to build those custom servers
actually you can you can just use natural computation.
To compute things so to speak you can use nature to compute you don't need to have done all that engineering and it's kind of the
it's kind of feels a little disappointing that you say we're going to build all these servers we're going to do all these things we're going to make you know maybe we're going to have human consciousness uploaded into you know some elaborate digital environment.
And then you look at that thing and you say it's got electrons moving around just like in a rock and then you say well what's the difference.
I'm principal computational equivalence says there isn't at some level a fundamental you know you can't say mathematically,
there's a fundamental difference between the rock that is the future of human consciousness and The Rock that's just a rock now what.
I've sort of realized with this kind of Consciousness thing is there is a there is an aspect of this that seems to be more special that isn't,
and for example something I haven't really teased a pot properly is when it comes to something like the weather and the weather having a mind of its own or whatever or your average you know Pulsar magnetosphere acting like a sort of intelligent thing how does that relate to
you know how to how is that.
That entity related to the kind of Consciousness that we have and sort of what would the world look like you know to the weather if we think about the weather as a mind.
What will it perceive what will it lose its laws of physics B I don't really know.
Because it's very parallel it's very powerful among other things and it it's not obvious,
I mean this is a really kind of mind-bending thing because we've got to try and imagine where you know we've got to try and imagine a parsing of the universe different from the one we have.
And by the way when we think about extraterrestrial intelligence and so on I think that's kind of the key thing is you know we've always assumed I've always assumed,
okay the extraterrestrials at least they have the same physics we all live in the same universe they've got the same physics.
But actually that's not really right because the extraterrestrials could have a completely different way of parsing.
That the universe so it's as if you know that could be for all we know right here in this room you know in the in the details of the motion of these gas molecules that could be an amazing intelligence.
That we would like but we have,
no way of we're not parsing the universe in the same way if only we could parse the universe in the right way you know immediately this amazing
thing that's going on in this you know huge culture that's developed and all that kind of thing would be obvious to us but it's not because we have a particular way of passing the universe would that thing also have us.
Agency I don't know the right word to use but something like Consciousness but a different kind of Consciousness I think it's a question of just what you mean by the word because I think that the you know this notion of Consciousness on the,
okay so some people think of Consciousness as sort of a key aspect of it is that we feel that.
The sort of a feeling of that we exist in some way that we have this intrinsic feeling about ourselves you know I suspect that.
Any of these things would also have an intrinsic feeling about themselves I've been sort of trying to think recently about constructing an experiment about what if you were just a piece of a cellular automaton let's see.
You know what would your feeling about yourself actually be and you know can we put ourselves in the in the shoes in the cells of the cellular automaton so to speak.
Can we can we get ourselves close enough to that that we can have a sense of what the world would be like if you were operating in that way,
and it's a little difficult because you know you have to not only think about what are you perceiving but also what's actually going on in your brain and our brains do what they actually do.
And they don't it's you know I think there might be some experiments that are possible with with you know knowing that's and so on
where you can have something where you can at least see in detail what's happening inside the system and I've been sort of one of the one of my projects to think about is there a way of kind of,
kind of getting a sense kind of from inside the system about what its view of the world is and how it how it you know can can we make a Bridge City the main issue is this what we're,
you know,
it's a sort of philosophically difficult thing because it's like we do what we do we understand ourselves at least to some extent we humans understand ourselves that's correct and but yet,
okay so what are we trying to do for example when we are trying to make a model of physics what are we actually trying to do because you know you say well can we work out what the universe does.
Well of course we can't we just watch the universe the universe does what it does but what we're trying to do when we make a model of physics is we're trying to get to the point where we can tell a story,
to ourselves that we understand that is also a representation of what the universe does.
So it's this kind of you know can we make a bridge between what we humans can understand in our minds,
and what the universe does and in a sense you know a large part of my kind of Life efforts have been devoted to making computational language which kind of is a bridge between what is possible in the computational universe,
and what we humans can conceptualize and think about in a sense what you know when I built well from language and our whole sort of computational language story.
It's all about how do you take sort of raw computation and this ocean of computational possibility,
and how do we sort of represent pieces of it in a way that we humans can understand and,
that map onto things that we care about doing and in a sense when you add physics you're adding this other piece where we can you know mediated by computer can we get physics to the point where we humans can understand something about what's happening in it,
and when we talk about an alien intelligence it's kind of the same story it's like.
Is the a way of mapping what's happening they're onto something that we humans can understand and you know physics,
in some sense is like our
exhibit one of the story of alien intelligences it's a it's a you know it's an alien intelligence in some sense and what we're doing in making a model of physics is mapping that onto something that we understand.
And I think
you know a lot of these other things that have recently been kind of studying whether it's microbiology other kinds of things which we can talk about a bit the
those are other cases where we're in a sense trying to again make that bridge between what we humans understand and sort of the natural language of that sort of alien intelligence in some sense when you're talking about.
Just to backtrack a little bit about cellular am being able to what's it like to be a cellular automata.
In the way that's equivalent to what it's like to be a conscious human being,
how do you approach that so is it looking at some subset of the cellular automata asking questions of that subset.
Like how the world is perceived how you doing like as that subset.
Like for that local pocket of computation what are you able to say about the broader something like and that's somehow than.
I can give you a sense of how to step outside of that so right but the tricky part is that that little subset.
It's what it's doing is it has a view of itself and the question is how do you get inside it.
It's like you know when we with humans right it's like we can't get inside each other's Consciousness that doesn't really you know that doesn't really even make sense
it's like there is an experience that somebody is having but you can perceive things from the outside but sort of getting inside it.
It doesn't it doesn't quite make sense and I you know for me these sort of philosophical issues in this one I have not untangled so let's be sure the you know for me
the thing that has been really interesting and thinking through some of these things as you know when it comes to questions about Consciousness or whatever else it's like when I can run a program and actually see pictures and you know make things concrete
I have a much better chance to understand what's going on then when I'm just trying to reason about things in a very abstract whatever that may be a way to map.
The program to your conscious experience so for example you play a video game you do a first person shooter you walk around inside.
This entity the up is very different thing than watching this entity so if you can somehow connect more and more connects this full conscious experience to the subset of the cellular automata
yeah it's something like that but the difference in the first-person shooter thing is this still your brain and your memory.
It's still remembering you know you you still have it's hard to I mean again what one's going to get.
One is not going to actually be able to be the cellular automaton once going to be able to watch what the cellular automaton does but this is the frustrating thing that I'm trying to understand.
You know how to how to think about being it so to speak okay so like in virtual reality there's a concept of immersion like with anything with video game with books this concept of immersion it feels like over time if the virtual reality
experience is as well done and maybe in the future will be extremely well done the immersion leads you to.
I feel like you mentioned memories you forget.
They you even ever existed outside that experience the also immersive I mean you could argue sort of mathematically that you can never truly become a murse but maybe you can,
I mean well yeah why can't you merge with the Cellular Tower that yeah but I mean you're probably just part of the same fabric why can't you just like.
Well that's a good question I mean so so let's imagine the following scenario let's imagine return what's that well but then can you return back well yeah right I mean it's like let's imagine you've uploaded you know your brain is scanned you've got every synapse you know mapped out.
You upload everything about you the brain stimulator you upload the brain stimulator and the Brain stimulator is basically you know some glorified cellular automaton.
And then you say well now we've got an answer to what does it feel like to be a cellular automaton it feels just like it felt.
To be ordinary you because that both computational systems and they're both you know operating in the same way so in a sense but I think there's there's somehow more to it because in that sense when you just making a brain simulator it's just you know.
With just saying there's another version of our Consciousness the question that we're asking is if we tease away from our Consciousness and get to something that is different.
How do we make a bridge to understanding what's going on there and you know there's a way of thinking about this
okay so this is coming on to sort of questions about the existence of the universe and so on but one of the things is there's this notion that we have of rule space
so we have this idea of this physical space which is you know something you can move around in that's that's associated with that actual the extent of the spatial hypergraph
then there's what we call Braun she'll space
the space of quantum branches so in this in this thing we call the multi-way graph of all of this sort of branching histories there's this idea of a kind of space where instead of moving around and physical space
you're moving from history to history so to speak from one possible history to another possible history and that's kind of a different kind of space that
is the space in which quantum mechanics plays out,
quantum mechanics like for example oh something like I think we're slowly understanding things like destructive interference and quantum mechanics that what's happening is
bronze Shields space is associated with phase and quantum mechanics and what's happening is the two photons that are supposed to be interfering and destructively destructive interfering a winding up a different ends of bronchial space and so us as these poor Observers
that are trying to that have branching brains that are trying to conflate together these different threads of History.
And say we've really got a consistent story that were telling how we're really knitting together these threads of History,
by the time the two photons wound up at opposite ends of bronchial space we just can't knit them together to tell a consistent story so for us,
that's sort of the analog of destructive interference got it and then there's rule Hill space to which is the space of rules yes well that's that's another level up so so there's there's the question.
Actually I do want to mention one thing because it's something I've realized in recent times and it's I think it's really really kind of cool which is about time dilation and relativity and it kind of helps to understand it's something that kind of helps,
and understanding what's going on so in according to relativity if you you know you have a clock it's taking it a certain rate.
You send it a spacecraft that's going at some significant fraction of the speed of light to you as a Observer at rest that clock,
that's in the spacecraft will seem to be taking much more slowly and so in other words you know it's kind of like the
the twin who goes off to Alpha Centauri and goes very fast will age much less than the twin who's on Earth that that is just hanging out whether hanging out okay why does that happen Okay so it has to do with what motion is so
in and out models of physics.
What is motion when you move from somewhere to somewhere it's you having to sort of recreate yourself at a different place in space.
When you existed a particular place and you just evolved with time your again you're updating yourself you're following these rules to update what happens.
Well so the question is when you have a certain amount of computation in you so to speak when there's a certain amount you know you're Computing the universe is Computing at a certain rate.
You can either use that computation to work out sitting still where you are what's going to happen successively in time.
Or you can use that computation to recreate yourself as you move around the universe and so time dilation ends up being as it's really cool actually that this is explainable in a in a way that isn't just
imagine the mathematics of Relativity but but that time dilation is a story of the fact that as you kind of recreating yourself as you move
you are using up some of your computation,
and so you don't have as much computation left over to actually work out what happens progressively with time so that means that time is running more slowly for you because
it is your you're using up your computation your clock can't take as quickly because
every tick of the clock is using up some computation but you already use that computation up on moving up you know half the speed of light or something and so that's that's why time dilation happens.
And so you can you can start so it's kind of interesting that one can sort of get an intuition about something like that because it has seemed like just a mathematical fact about the mathematics of special relativity and so on.
Well for me it's a little bit confusing what the you and that picture is because you're using up computation.
Okay so so what somebody's saying,
The Entity is updating itself according to the way that the Universe updates itself and the question is your.
You know those updates that's imagine the you is a clock okay and the caulk has you know there's all these the updates the hypergraph and a sequence of updates cause the pendulum to swing back the other way
and then swing back swinging back and forth okay and all of the all of those updates.
All contributing to the motion of the pendulum going back and forth or the little oscillator moving whatever it is.
Okay but but then the alternative is that sort of situation one where the thing is that rest situation to where it's kind of moving the the what's happening is
it is having to recreate itself at every at every moment the thing is going to have to do the computations to be able to
sort of recreate itself at a different position in space,
and that's kind of the intuition behind so it's either going to spend its computation recreating itself at a different position in space or it's going to spend its computation
doing the sort of doing the updating of.
The you know of the ticking of the clock so to speak so the more updating is doing the less the ticking of the clock up days doing.
That's right the more it's as having to update because of motion yeah the less it can update the the clock.
So that's some I mean obviously there's a there's a sort of mathematical version of it that relates to how it actually works in relativity but that's kind of to me that was sort of exciting to me that it's possible to have a really mechanically explainable story there.
That that isn't and it's similarly in quantum mechanics this notion of branching brains perceiving branching universes,
to me that's getting towards a sort of mechanically explainable version of what happens in quantum mechanics even though it's a little bit mind-bending to see you know these things about
under what circumstances can you successfully knit together those different threads of history and when two things sort of Escape.
And those kinds of things but the you know the thing about this physical space,
and physical space the main sort of big theory is generativity the theory of gravity and that tells you how things move and physical space.
And bronze Shields space the big theory is the firemen path integral which it turns out tells you essentially how things move and Quantum in the space of quantum phases so it's kind of like motion and bronchial space.
And it's kind of a fun thing to start thinking about what.
Oh you know all these things that we know in physical space like event Horizons and black holes and so on what are the analogous things in Broncho space for example the speed of light what's the analog of the speed of light and bronchial space it's the maximum speed of quantum entanglement.
So the speed of light is.
Flash bulb goes off here what's the maximum rate at which the effect of that flashbulb is detectable moving away in space.
So similarly in bronchial space something happens and the question is
how far in this brown she'll space in the space of quantum States how far away can that get within a certain period of time and so there's this notion of a maximum entanglement speed and
that might be observable that's the thing we've been sort of poking at his might there be a way to observe it even in some Atomic physics kind of situation that because one of the things that's weird in quantum mechanics,
is will you know when we study quantum mechanics we mostly study it,
in terms of small numbers of particles you know this electron does this this thing on an ion trap does that and so on,
but when we do with large numbers of particles kind of all bets are off it's kind of too complicated to deal with quantum mechanics and so what ends up happening is
so this question about maximum entanglement speed and things like that may actually play in one of these in the sort of story of many-body quantum mechanics and even have some suspicions about things that might happen even in,
one of the things I realized I'd never understood and it's kind of embarrassing but I think I Now understand a little better is when you have chemistry.
And you have quantum mechanics it's like well there's two carbon atoms is this molecule and we do a reaction.
And we draw a diagram we said this carbon atom ends up in this place it's like but wait a minute
and quantum mechanics nothing ends up in a definite place there's always just some wave function for this to happen how can it be the case that we can draw these reasonable it just ended up in this place and you have to kind of say well the environment of the molecule,
effectively made a bunch of measurements on the molecule to keep it kind of classical and that's a story that has to do with.
This whole thing about about you know measurements have to do with this idea
of you know can we conclude that something definite happened because in quantum mechanics the intrinsic quantum mechanics the mathematics of quantum mechanics is all about they're just these amplitudes for different things to happen then there's this thing of and then we make a measurement.
And we conclude that something definite happened and that has to do with this thing I think about sort of moving about knitting together these different threads of History,
and saying this is now something where we can definitively say something definite happen in the traditional theory of quantum mechanics it's just like.
You know after you've done all the sample should computation then this big hammer comes down and you do a measurement and it's all over and that's been very confusing for example in Quantum computing.
It's been a very confusing thing because when you say
you know in Quantum Computing the basic idea is you're going to use all these separate threads of computation so to speak to do all the different parts of you know try these different factors for an integer or something like this and it looks like you can do a lot because you've got all these different threads going on.
But then you have to say well at the end of it you've got all these threads and every thread came up with a definite answer but we got to conflate those together
to figure out a definite thing that we humans can take away from it a definite so the computer actually produced this output so having
this Branch all space and this hyper graph model of physics do you think it's possible to then make predictions that are definite about many-body quantum mechanical systems
is that the whole I think it's likely yes.
But I don't you know this is every one of these things when you when you go from the underlying Theory which is complicated enough in its I mean
the theory at some level is beautifully simple but as soon as you start actually trying to it's this whole question about how do you bridge it to things that we humans can talk about it gets really complicated,
and and this thing about actually getting it to a definite definite prediction
about you know definite thing you can say about chemistry or something like this you know that's just a lot of work so I'll give you an example there's a thing called the quantum Zeno effect so
the idea is you know Quantum stuff happens but then if you make a measurement your kind of freezing time in quantum mechanics you and and so it looks like there's a possibility that would sort of the relationship between the quantum Zeno effect.
And the way that many-body quantum mechanics works and so on maybe just conceivably it may be possible to actually figure out a way to measure.
The maximum entanglement speed and the reason we can potentially do that is because the systems we deal with in terms of atoms and things they're pretty big
you know a mole of atoms is you know it's a lot of atoms and you know but it isn't a very you know it's something where to get you know when we're dealing with how can you see 10 to the minus 100 so to speak well by the time you've got you know 10 to the 30th Adams.
You're not you know you with in a little bit closer Striking Distance of that it's not like oh we've just got you know.
Two atoms and we're trying to see down to 10 to the minus 100 meters or whatever.
So I don't know how it work but this is a this is a potential direction if you can tell by the way if we could measure the maximum entanglement speed,
we would know the elementary length these are all related so if we get that one number we just need one number.
If we can get that one number we can you know the theory has no parameters anymore.
Um under you know there are other places well there's another another hope for doing that is in cosmology.
And this model one of the features is the universe is not fixed dimensional I mean we think we live in three-dimensional space but this hypergraph doesn't have any particular dimension.
It can emerge as something which on an approximation it's as if you know you say what's the volume of a sphere in the hyper graph where a sphere is defined as how many nodes do you get to when you go a distance R away from a given point.
And you can say well if I get to about our Cube nodes,
when I go a distance R away in the hypergraph then I'm living roughly in three-dimensional space but you might also get to our to the point you know 2.92
you know for some value of r
and you know as R increases that might be the sort of fit to what happens and so one of the things we suspect is that the very early Universe was essentially infinite dimensional.
And that as the universe expanded it became lower dimensional.
And so one of the things that is another little sort of point where we think there might be a way to actually measure some things is to mention fluctuations in the early universe,
that is is there a is there leftover Dimension fluctuation of at the time of the cosmic microwave background 100,000 years or something after the beginning of the universe is it still the case that there are there were pieces of the universe
that didn't have to mention three that had to mention 3.01 or something and can we tell that is that possible to observe.
The fluctuations in Dimensions I don't even know what that entails okay so the the question.
Which should be an elementary exercise in electrodynamics except it isn't is some understanding what happens to a photon when it propagates through 3.0 one dimensional space so for example the inverse Square law
is a consequence of the you know the surface area of a sphere is
proportional to r squared but if you're not in three dimensional space the surface area of sphere is not,
proportional to r squared it's are to the whatever 2.01 or something and so that means that.
I think when you kind dry and do Optics.
You know a common principle in Optics is Huygens principle which basically says that every piece of a wave front of a light is a source of new spherical waves and those spherical waves if they're different dimensional spherical waves.
We'll have other characteristics and so there will be bizarre Optical phenomena,
which we haven't figured out yet so you're what looking for some weird Photon trajectories that designate that it's 3.01 dimensional space yeah.
Yeah that would be an example of I mean you know there are only a certain number of things we can measure about photons you know we can measure the polarization we can measure that frequency we can measure that direction,
those kinds of things and you know how that all works out and you know in the current models of physics.
You know it's been hard to explain how the universe managers to be as uniform as it is and that's led to this inflation idea that to the,
the great annoyance of my then collaborator I we hit we figured out and like 1979 we had this realization that you could get something like this but it seemed implausible that's the way the universe works so we put in a footnote
until that was so that's a but any case I've never really completely believed it but this
that's an idea for how to Puff out the universe faster than the speed of light early moments of the universe that that's the sort of inflation idea and that that you can somehow explain how the universe manages to be as uniform as it is
in our model this turns out to be much more natural because the universe just starts very connected the hypergraph is not.
Such that the ball that you grow starting from a single point has volume R cubed it might have volume art of the 500 or art of the infinity.
Um and so that means that you sort of naturally get this much higher degree of connectivity in uniformity in the universe and then the question is this is sort of mathematical physics challenge.
Is in the standard theory of the universe there's the Freebird moments of Wako Universe which is the kind of standard model where the universe is isotropic and homogeneous and you can then work out the equations of general relativity and you can figure out how the universe expands.
We would like to do the same kind of thing including Dimension change this is just difficult mathematical physics.
I mean the reason it's difficult is the sort of fundamental reason it's difficult when when people invented calculus 300 years ago calculus was a story of understanding.
Change and change as a function of a variable,
so people study univariate calculus they study multivariate calculus it's one variable its two variables three variables but who ever studied you know 2.5 variable calculus.
Turns out nobody.
Turns out that but what we need to have to understand these fractional dimensional spaces which don't work like well there are spaces where where the effective Dimension is not.
An integer you can't apply the tools of calculus
and naturally and easily to fractional Dimensions know somebody has to figure out how to do that we are trying to figure this out I mean it's it's very interesting and it's very
connected to very Frontier issues in mathematics is very beautiful but so is it possible is it possible we're dealing with scale that's so so much smaller than our human scale.
Is it possible to make predictions versus explanations do you have a hope that will just hyper graph model you'll be able to make predictions yeah that,
then could be validated with a physics experiment predictions that couldn't have been done or weren't done otherwise yeah I mean you know I think which in which domain do you think okay so they're going to be cosmology ones to do with Dimension fluctuations in the universe that's a very bizarre effect nobody you know Dimension fluctuation is just something
nobody ever looked for that if anybody sees Dimension fluctuation that's a huge flag that the that something like our model is going on.
If and how one detects that you know that's a problem of kind of
you know that's a problem of traditional physics in a sense of what's the best way to actually figure that out and for example that's one there are there are all kinds of things one can imagine I mean their things.
That in black hole mergers it's possible that there will be effects of Maximum entanglement speed and large black hole mergers,
that's another another possible thing and all of that is detected through like what do you have a hope for ligo type of situation like this gravitational waves or alternatively I mean,
I think it's you know look figuring out experiments.
Is like figuring out technology inventions that is you know you've got a set of raw materials you've got an underlying model and now you've got to be very clever,
to figure out you know what is that thing I can measure that just somehow you know Leverage is into the right place.
And we've spent less effort on that than I would have liked.
Because I was one of the one of the reasons is that that I think that the this you know the physicists have been working on on our models and we know lots of visitors such as very very nice it's kind of it's one of these cases where
I'm almost I'm really kind of
pleasantly surprised that the sort of absorption of the things we've done has been quite rapid and quite sort of you know very positive so it's a Cambrian explosion of physicists to not just ideas.
Yes I mean you know a lot of what's happened.
Really interesting and again not what I expected is there are a lot of areas of sort of very elaborate sophisticated mathematical physics.
Whether that's causal set theory whether it's higher category Theory whether its categorical quantum mechanics all sorts of elaborate names for these things spin that works perhaps you know causal dynamical triangulations all kinds of names of
of these fields and these fields have a bunch of good mathematical physicists in them who've been working for decades and these particular areas.
And the question is but but that they've been building these mathematical structures.
And the mathematical structures are interesting but they're not they don't typically sit on anything they just mathematical structures and I think what's happened is our models provide kind of machine code.
That lives underneath those models,
so typical example this is due to Jonathan gorod who's one of the key people has been working on a project this is
and okay so cause I'll give you an example just to give a sense of how these things connect this is in causal set theory so the idea of causal set theory is.
There are in space time we imagine that there's space and time it's a 3 plus 1 dimensional you know setup.
We imagine that there are just events that happen at different times and places in space and time.
And the idea of causal set theory is the only thing you said about the universe is there a bunch of events that happen sort of randomly at different places in space and time.
And then the whole sort of Theory of physics has to be to do with the this graph of causal relationships between these randomly thrown down events.
So they've always been confused by the fact that to get even Ranson variants even relativistic invariance
you need a very special way to throw down those events and they've had no natural way to understand how that would happen so what Jonathan figured out is that in fact from our models,
they instead of just generating a rents at random our models
necessarily generate events in some pattern in space-time effectively that then leads to run some variants and relativistic invariance and all those kinds of things so it's a place where all the mathematics that's been done on well we just have a random collection of events,
now what you know what consequences does that have in terms of.
Causal set there and so on that can all be kind of wheeled in now that we have some different underlying foundational idea for what the particular distribution of events is as opposed to just what we throw down random events.
And so that's a that's a typical sort of example of what we're seeing in all these different areas of kind of how you can take,
you know really interesting things that have been done in mathematical physics and connect them and it's really kind of beautiful because the you know the sort of the abstract models we have just seem to plug into all these different very interesting very elegant abstract ideas.
But we're now giving sort of a reason for that to be the way for a reason for one to care I mean it's like saying,
you can you know you can think about computation abstractly you know you can think about I don't know combinator's or something as abstract computational things and you can sort of do all kinds of study of them but it's like why do we care.
Well okay turn machines are good start because you can kind of see that sort of mechanically doing things but when we actually start thinking about computers Computing things we have a really good reason to care.
And this is sort of what we're what we're providing I think is a reason to care about a lot of these areas of mathematical physics so that's been that's been very nice so I'm not sure we've ever got to the.
The question of why does the universe know this little let's let's let's talk about that yes so weird.
It's not the simplest question in the world so so it's it takes a few steps to get to it and it's nevertheless even surprising that you can even begin to answer this question and Daisy was saying I'm very surprised.
So the next thing to perhaps understand is this idea of rule space.
So we've got kind of physical space we've got bronchial space the space of possible Quantum histories.
And now we've got another level of kind of abstraction which is Rule space and hears that his where that comes from so you say okay you say we've got
this model for the universe we've got a particular Rule and we run this Rule and we get the universe okay so that's that's interesting why that rule why not another rule.
So that confused me for a long time then I realized well actually what if.
The thing could be using all possible rules whatever at every step in addition to saying apply a particular rule at all places in this type of graph.
One could say just take all possible rules and apply all possible rules at all plus more places than the side program.
Okay and then you make this rule multi-way graph which both is or possible histories for a particular Rule and all possible rules,
so the next thing you'd say is how can you get anything reasonable out how can anything you know Real come out of the set of all possible rules applied in all possible ways.
Okay there's a subtle thing so which I haven't fully untangled the there is this object which is the result of running all possible rules in all possible ways.
And you might say if you're running all possible rules why can't everything possible happen well the answer is because.
When you the sort of this entanglement that occurs so let's say that you have a lot of different possible initial conditions a lot of different possible States then you're applying these different rules.
Well some of those rules can end up with the same state.
So it isn't the case that you can just get from anywhere to anywhere there's this whole entangled structure of what can lead to what and there's a definite structure that's produced.
I think I'm going to call that definite structure the Rulli add the limit of the limits of kind of,
all possible rules being applied in all possible ways you saying that structure is finite so that somehow connects to maybe similar kind of thing is like causal and variance
well there have been truly odd necessarily has caused one variants that's a feature of that's just a mathematical consequence of essentially using all possible rules
plus Universal computation
gives you the fact that for many Divergent pause you can always the past will always convert does that say that the rule is that necessarily infer that the rule e ad is.
Finite in the end it's not necessarily finite I mean it's a it's a
the just like the history of the universe may not be finite list of the universe time may keep going forever you can keep running the computations of the rule yard and you'll keep spewing out more and more and more structure it's like time doesn't have to end
it's some that but the issue is there are there are three limits that happen in this really odd object one is how long you run the computation for.
Another is how many different rules you're applying another is how many different states you start from and the mixture of those three limits I mean this is just mathematically.
Horrendous.
And what's interesting about this object is the one thing that does seem to be the case about this object is it connects with ideas and higher category Theory and in particular it connects to some of the 20th Century's most abstract mathematics.
Done by this chop growth indeed.
Um ghost and each had a thing called Infinity group Boyd which is closely related to this really odd object although the details the relationship you know I don't fully understand yet.
I think that the what's interesting is this thing that is sort of this very limiting object so so okay so a way to think about this that that again,
will take us into another Direction which is the equivalence between physics and Mathematics the way that.
Well let's see maybe this is just to give a sense of this kind of.
Groupoid and things like that you can think about in mathematics you can think you have certain axioms they're kind of like atoms and you well actually let's say.
Let's talk about mathematics for a second so what is mathematics what is what is it made of so-to-speak mathematics there's a bunch of statements like
for Edition X Plus Y is equal to Y plus X that's a statement of mathematics another statement will be you know x squared minus 1 is equal to X Plus 1 x minus 1
there are infinite number of these possible statements in mathematics is that I mean it's not just a guess a statement but with X Plus y it's a rule that you can
you think of it as a rule it's a it is a it is a rule it's also just a thing that is true in mathematics right,
the statement of Truth okay right.
And what you can imagine is you you imagine just laying out this giant kind of ocean of all all statements well actually you first start okay this is where.
This was segueing into a different thing let me let me not go in this direction for us that's not go to metamathematics just yeah will maybe get to metamathematics but it's some
so let me not let me explain the group I'd and things later yes but but so let's come back to the universe always a good place to
bien Sur is the what is the universe has to do with the rule we add the really all space and how that's possible leak connected to why the thing exists at all and why there's we just one of them
yes okay so here's the point so the thing that had confused me for a long time was let's say we get.
The rule for the universe we hold it in our hands we said this is our universe then the immediate question is why isn't another one.
And you know that's kind of the you know the sort of the lesson of Copernicus says we're not very special so how come we got Universe number 312
not Universe quadrillion quadrillion quadrillion and I think the resolution of that is the realization that there that the universe.
Is running all possible rules so then you say well how on Earth do we perceive the universe to be running according to a particular rule,
how do we perceive definite things happening in the universe well it's the same story it's the Observer there is a reference frame that we are picking in this rule space.
And that is what
determines our perception of the universe with our particular sensory information and so on we are parsing the universe in this particular way so here's the way to think about it in physical space we live in a particular place in the universe.
And you know we could live at Alpha Centauri but we don't we live here and similarly in rule space.
We could live in many different places in rural space but we happen to live here and what does it mean to live here it means we have certain sensory input we have certain ways to parse the universe those are our interpretation of the universe.
What would it mean to travel in real space.
What it basically means is that we are successively interpreting the universe in different ways so in other words to be at a different point in real space is to have a different in a sense of different interpretation of what's going on in the universe.
And we can imagine even things like an analog of the speed of light.
As the maximum speed of translation in real space and so on the way what's the interpretation.
It's a real space with and we is I'm confused by the we and the interpretation and the Universe I thought moving about and Rule space changes the way the universe.
Is is.
The the way we would perceive it the way that they'll so he's ultimately has to do with the perception so it doesn't real rule your space is not somehow changing.
Like branching into another Universe something like that no I mean part of the points is the the whole point of this is the rule yard is sort of.
The encapsulated version of everything that is the universe running according to all possible we think of our universe the observable universe.
As thing so we're a little bit loose with the word Universe then because I wouldn't the really add a potentially encapsulate.
Very large number like combinatorially large may be infinite.
Set of what we fit human physicists think of as universes that's an interesting interesting parsing of the wood Universe right because what we're saying is just as we're at a particular place in physical space were at a particular place in rural space.
That particular place in real space our experience of the universe is this yeah just as if we lived at the center of the Galaxy our universe our experience of the universe will be different from the one that is given where we actually live.
And so in a what was saying is our when you might say
I mean in a sense this this really odd is sort of a super universe so to speak but it's all entangled together it's not like you can separate out you can say let me
it's like when we take a referent okay it's like our experience the universe is based on where we are in the universe.
We could imagine moving to somewhere else in the universe but it's still the same universe so there's not like universes.
Existing in parallel no because because the whole point is that if we were able to change our interpretation of what's going on.
We could perceive a different reference frame in this rule yard
yeah but that's not that's not that's just yeah that's the same really add that's the same universe you're just moving about these just coordinates and but it looks so so the way that's the reason that's interesting is.
Imagine the Extraterrestrial intelligence so the alien intelligence we should say the alien intelligence might live on Alpha Centauri
but it might also live at a different place in real space it can live right here on Earth it's just has a different reference frame that is includes a very different perception of the universe right and then because that really all space is very large.
I mean do we get to communicate with them right that's yeah but it's also well one thing is how.
Different the perception of the universe could be I think this could be bizarrely.
Unimaginably completely different and I mean one thing to realize is even in kind of.
Things I don't understand well you know I'm I know about the kind of Western tradition of understanding you know science and all that kind of thing and you know you talk to people who say well I you know I'm really into
some you know Eastern tradition of this that and the other and it's really obvious to me what how things work.
I don't understand at all but you know it is not obvious I think with this kind of realization that there's these very different,
ways to interpret what's going on in the universe that kind of gives me at least State doesn't help me to understand that different interpretation,
but it gives me at least more respect for the possibility that there will be other interpretations yeah it humbles you to the possibility that like what is it reincarnation or all these like Eternal recurrence with niches like just these ideas,
yeah.
Well you know the thing that I realized about a bunch of those things is that you know I've been sort of doing my little survey of the history of philosophy just trying to understand you know what can I actually say now about some of these things.
And you realize that some of these Concepts like the immortal Soul concept which you know I remember when I was a kid and you know it was kind of a lots of religion bashing type stuff with people saying you know what we know about physics,
tell us how much does a soul way and people are like well how can it be a thing if it doesn't weigh anything.
Well now we understand you know there is this notion of what's in brains that isn't the matter of brains and it's something computational.
And there is a sense and in fact it is correct that it is in some sense in Mortal because this pattern of computation is something abstract that is not specific to the particular material of a brain
now we don't know how to extract it
you know in our traditional scientific approach but it's still something where it isn't a crazy thing to say there is something doesn't weigh anything that's a kind of a silly question how much does it weigh
well actually maybe it isn't such a silly question and I model of physics Because the actual computational activity.
Has has a consequence for gravity and things but that's a very special you because the first talk about mass and energy and so on there could be a what would you call a solar Tron.
Yes yes yes particle that somehow contains sonus yeah right well that's what by the way
that's what leibnitz said and you know one thing I've never understood this you know leibniz had this letter of monads and monod ology and he had this idea that that what exists in the universe is this big collection of monads and that they
that the only thing that one knows about the monads are sort of how they relate to each other
sounds awfully like hypergraphs right and but leibnitz had really lost me at the following thing he said each of these monads has a soul.
Each of them has a Consciousness and it's like okay I'm out of here I don't understand this at all I don't know what's going on but I realized recently that in his day
the concept that a thing could do something could spontaneously do something that was his only way of describing that and so what I would now say is well as this just abstract rule that runs to leibnitz that would have been
you know in 1690 or whatever that would have been kind of well it has a soul that has a consciousness.
And so you know in a sense it's like one of these there's no new idea Under the Sun so to speak that's the you know that's a sort of a version of the same kinds of ideas but couched in terms
that are sort of bizarrely different from the ones that we would use today would you be able to maybe play Devil's Advocate on the your conception of Consciousness that,
like the two characteristics of it there is constrained and there's a single thread of time is it possible the leibniz was onto something that.
The basic atom
the screen Adam of space has a Consciousness is that so these are just words right but what is there is there some sense where Consciousness is much more fundamental than you're making it seem don't know
I mean the you know I think can you construct the world in which it is much more fundamental.
I think that okay so the question would be is there a way to think about kind of.
If we sort of parse the universe down at the level of atoms of space or something.
Could we say well so that's really a question of a different point of view a different place in real space were asking you're asking a question could that be a civilization,
that exists could there be sort of conscious entities that exist at the level of atoms of space and what would that be like,
and I think that comes back to this question of can we you know what's it like to be a cellular automaton type thing I mean it's you know I'm.
I'm not yet they're like I don't know I mean I think that the this is a I don't even know yet quite,
how to think about this and the sense that I was considering you know I'm never write fiction but I haven't written it since I was like 10 years old my fiction I made one attempt which I sent to some
science fiction writer friends of mine and they told me it was terrible so the but this is a long time ago no it was recently recently they said it was terrible that be interesting to see you write a short story based on what sounds like it's already inspiring short stories by or stories yeah right science fiction writers
but I think the interesting thing for me is.
You know in the what does it what is it like to be a whatever yeah how do you describe that I mean it's like that's not a thing that you described in mathematics that what is it like to be such and such what's he to me when you say what is it like to be something.
Presumes that you're talking about a singular entity so yeah.
Like there's a some kind of feeling of the entity the stuff that's inside of it and the stuff that's outside of it.
And then that's when Consciousness starts making sense but but then.
It seems like that could be generalizable if you take some subset of a cellular automata you could start talking about what does that subset.
Maybe feel but then you can I think you can just take arbitrary numbers of subsets like that to me like you and I.
I individually our consciousnesses but you could also say the two of us together is a singular conscious Maybe.
Maybe I'm not so sure about that I think that the single thread of time thing may be pretty important and that as soon as you start saying
there are two different threads of time there are two different experiences and then we have to say how do they relate how they sort of entangled with each other I mean that may be a different story of a thing that isn't much like.
You know the what do the ants you know what's it like to be an aunt you know where there's a sort of more Collective view of the world so to speak I don't know I think that
I mean this is you know
I don't really have a good I mean my best thought is you know can we turn it into a human story it's like the question of
you know when we try and understand physics can we turn that into something which is sort of a human understandable narrative and now what's it like to be a such and such.
You know maybe the only medium in which we can describe that as something like fiction where it's kind of like you're telling you know the life story in that in that in that setting but I'm
this is this is beyond what I've what I've yet understood how to do yeah but it does seem so like with human consciousness
you know were made up of cells and like there's a bunch of systems
the networked that work together that at this at the human level.
Feel like a single Consciousness when you take yes and so maybe like an ant colonies just too low level sorry an ant is too low level right maybe have to look at the ant colony yeah I agree I could there's some level of which.
It's a conscious being and then if I go to the planetary scale.
And maybe that's going too far so there's a nice sweet spot yeah right Consciousness no I mean I agree I think I think the difficulty is that you know.
Okay so in sort of people who talk about Consciousness yes one of the one of the Terrible Things I've realized because I've now interacted with some of this community so to speak of interesting people who do that kind of thinking but
you know one of the things I was saying to one of the leading people in that area I was saying you know that you know it must be kind of
frustrating because it's kind of like a poetry story that is many people writing poems but few people are reading them yes so there are always these different you know everybody has their own Theory Of Consciousness and they are very non inter
sort of inter discussable and by the way
I mean you know my own approach to sort of the question of Consciousness as far as I'm concerned I'm an applied Consciousness operative so to speak because I don't really in a sense the thing I'm trying to get out of it,
his how does it help me to understand what's a possible Theory of physics and how does it help me to say how do I go from this this incoherent collection of things happening in the universe.
To our definite perception and definite laws and so on and that sort of an applied version of Consciousness and and I think the reason it's sort of segues to a different kind of topic but the reason that.
One of the things I'm particularly interested in is kind of what's the analog of Consciousness and systems very different from brains.
And so why is that matter well you know this whole description of this kind of.
But you know what we haven't talked about why the universe exists so let's let's get to why the universe exists and then we then we can contort about perhaps a little bit about,
what these models of physics kind of show you about other kinds of things like molecular Computing and so on yes let's good why does the universe exist,
okay so we finally sort of more or less set the stage we've got this idea of this really odd.
Of this object that is made from following all possible rules the fact that it's sort of not just this incoherent mess it's got all this entangled structure in it.
And so on okay so what is this really odd well it is the working out of all possible formal systems.
So the sort of the question why does the universe exist its core question you kind of started with is you've got to bust two equals four you've got some other abstract results.
But that's not actualized it's just an abstract thing and when we say we got a model for the universe okay it's this rule you run it and it'll make the universe but it's like.
But you know where is it actually running.
What what what is what is it actually doing right what is it actual or is it merely a formal description of something okay.
So the thing to realize with this with this the thing about the rule yard is it's an inevitable it is.
The entangled running of all possible rules so you don't get to say it's not like you're saying which truly are you picking.
Because it's all possible formal rules it's not like it's just.
You know well actually it's only footnote the only footnote it's an important footnote is it's all possible computational rules.
Not hyper computational rules that is it's running all the rules that would be accessible to a turing machine.
But is not running all the rules that will be accessible to a thing that can solve problems in finite time that would take a turing machine infinite time to solve.
So you can even Alan Turing knew this that you could make oracle's for Turing machines where you say a turing machine can't solve the halting problem for Turing machines it can't know what will happen in any turing machine after an infinite time.
In any finite time but you could invent a box just make a black box you say I'm going to sell you an oracle that will just tell you you press this button it will tell you what the turing machine will do after an infinite time you can imagine such a box.
You can't necessarily build one in the physical universe but you can imagine such a box and so we could say well in addition to so in this really add we're imagining
that there is a computational that at the end it's running rules that our computational it doesn't have a bunch of Oracle black boxes in it.
You say well why not Well turns out if their article black boxes.
The Rulli add that is you can make a sort of super really odd that contains those Oracle black boxes but it has a cosmological Event Horizon relative to the first one they can't communicate.
In other words you can you can end up with what you end up happening what ends up happening is it's like in the physical universe.
We in this causal graph that represents the causal relationships of different things you can have an event horizon where there's where the causal graph is disconnected.
Were the effect here an event Happening Here does not affect an event happening here because there's a disconnection in the course of graph now that's what happens in The Event Horizon and so the what will happen between this kind of the ordinary rule yard,
and the hyper Riyadh is there is an event horizon and you know we in our rule yard we'll just never know that,
that is that that just separate things they're not they're not connected and maybe I've known as standing but just because we can't observe it.
Why does that mean it doesn't exist.
So you it might exist but it does it's not clear what it it's so what so to speak whether it exists you know what we're trying to understand is why does our universe exist.
We're not trying to ask the question what you know it's.
Let me say another thing I mean make a meta comment okay which is that that I have not thought through this hyper really ad business properly so I'm I can't the the hyper really add is referring to.
I really had in which hyper computation as possible that's correct okay so like what the that footnote the footnote to the footnote.
Is we're not sure why.
This is important yeah that's right so let's ignore that okay it's already abstract enough okay so so okay so the one question is.
We have to say if we're saying why does the universe exist one question is why is it this universe and Not Another Universe yeah okay so the important point about this really odd idea.
Is that it's in the really odd are all possible formal systems.
So there's no choice being made there's no there's no like oh we picked this particular universe and not that one,
that's the first thing the second thing is the that we have to ask the question so so you say why does two plus two equals four exist.
That's not really a that is a thing that necessarily is that way just on the basis of the meaning of the terms 2 and plus some equals and so on
so the thing is that this this really odd object
is in a sense a necessary object it is just the thing that is the consequence of working out the consequence of the formal definition of things
you don't it is not a thing where you're saying and this is picked as the particular thing this is just something which necessarily.
Is that thing because of the definition of what it means to have computations is there really a it's a formal system yes.
But does it exist ah well where are we in this whole thing.
We are part of this really hard and so our so there is no sense to say does two plus two equals four exist
well that's that's in some sense it necessarily exists it's a necessary object it's not a thing that way you can ask
you know it's usually in philosophy there's a sort of Distinction made between you know necessary tools contingent truths analytic proposition synthetic propositions are a variety of different versions of this the things which are necessarily true just based on the definition of terms.
And there are things which happen to be true in our universe but.
What weird we don't exist in real space we that's one of the coordinates that Define our existence right okay so yes yes but this really add is
the set of all possible rule coordinates so what we're saying is it contains that so what we're saying is we exist,
okay so our perception of what's going on is where the particular place in this rule yard and we are concluding certain things about how the universe works based on that but the question is do we understand you know
is there something where we say so why is it work that way.
Well the answer is I think it has to work that way because.
This there isn't this really odd it's a necessary object in the sense that it is a purely formal.
Just like two plus two equals four it's not an object that was made of something it's an object that is just an expression of.
The necessary collection of formal relations that exist and so then the issue is can we in our experience of that.
Is it you know can we have tables and chairs so to speak in that just by virtue of our experience of that necessary thing and you know what people have generally thought and honestly that I don't know of a lot of.
Discussion of this why does the universe exist question it's been a very.
I've been surprised actually at how little I mean I think it's one of these things that really kind of far out there but the thing that that is you know the surprise here is that.
All possible formal rules.
When you run them together and that's the critical thing when you run them together they produce this kind of entangled structure that has a definite structure it's not just.
You know a random arbitrary thing it's a thing with definite structure and that structure.
Is the thing when we are embedded in that structure when when anything they an entity embedded in that structure perceives something which is.
Then we can interpret as physics and things like this so in other words we don't have to ask the question the the why does it exist,
it necessarily exist I'm missing this part why doesn't necessarily say okay okay let me know thank you need to have a.
If you want to formalize the relation between entities but why did why do you need to have relations okay okay so so.
Let's say you say well it's like why does math have to exist.
Okay that's the first question yeah okay fair question let's see I think the thing to think about is.
The existence of mathematics is something we're given a definition of terms.
What follows from that definition inevitably follows.
So now you can say why Define any terms but in a sense the.
Well that's okay so the definition of terms I mean I think the way to think about this let me see so like.
Concrete terms the stakes in Crete I mean that just things like you know.
Logical or righty but that's the thing.
That's a powerful thing well it's just yes okay but it's a the point is that it is not a thing of our you know people imagine there is I don't know
the you know an elephant or something or the you know elephants are presumably not
necessary objects they are they happen to exist as a result of kind of biological evolution and whatever else but the
the thing is that in some sense that there is it is a different kind of thing to say does plus exist.
The not it's not like an elephant so plus is seems more fundamental more basic than an elephant yes but.
You can imagine a world without.
Plus or anything like it like why do formal things that are discreet that can be used.
To reason after exist or go well okay so why okay so then the question is but the whole point is.
Computation we can certainly imagine computation that is we can certainly say there is a formal system that we can construct abstractly in our minds that is computation.
And that that's the you know we can we can imagine it now the question is is it is.
That formal system once we exist as observers embedded in that formal system that's enough to have something which is like iuniverse yeah.
And so then the then what you're kind of asking is perhaps is why I mean.
The point is we definitely can't imagine it there's nothing that says that we're not saying that there's it sort of inevitable that that.
Is a thing that we can imagine we don't have to ask does it exist we're just it is definitely something we can imagine now that's then we have this thing that is a formally constructible thing.
That we can imagine and now we have to ask the question what you know given that formerly constructible thing what is
what consequences does that with if we were to perceive that for Malika if we were embedded in that formerly constructible thing what will we be perceive about the world and we would say we perceive that the world exists,
because we we are seeing all of this mechanism of all these things happening and but that's something that is just a feature of it's something where we are.
See another way of asking this I'm trying to get at I understand why it feels like this rule we add is necessary hmm.
But maybe it's just me being human but it feels like then.
You should be able to not us but somehow step outside of the rule yet.
Like what's outside the rule yet well the really odd is all formal systems so there's nothing.
Because but that is what everyone would say I know that's what a human would say because we're used to the idea that there there's but the whole point is that by the time it's all possible formal systems it's it's like
it is all things you can imagine but all computations you can imagine but like we don't.
Well so what we don't do is that could be other code okay so so that's that's a fact question is it possible to encode are all,
once we is that something that isn't what we can represent formerly
right that is that is something that and that's I think related to the hyper rule yard footnote so to speak of them which I'm afraid that the you know one of the things sort of interesting about this is,
you know there has been some discussion of this in Theology and things like that but,
which I don't necessarily understand all of but the the key sort of new input is this idea that.
All possible formal systems it's like you know if you make a world people say well you make a world
with a particular in a particular way with particular rules but no you don't do that you can make a world that deals with all possible rules and then merely by virtue of
living in a particular place in that world so to speak we have the perception we have of what the world is like now I have to say the the,
it's sort of interesting because I've you know I wrote this piece about this and I you know this philosophy stuff is not super easy and I've
as I'm as I'm talking to you about it and I actually haven't you know people have been interested in lots of different things we've been doing but this why does the universe exists has been I would say one of the one of the ones that you would think people would be most interested in
but actually I think that just like oh that's just something complicated that so so I haven't
I haven't explained it as much as I've explained a bunch of other things and I have to say I think I think I may be missing a couple of pieces of that argument that
would be so so it's kind of a like why you are your conscious being is computationally bounded so you're missing D having written a quite a few.
Articles yourself you you're now missing some of the pieces yes well being human right.
One of the consequences of this why the unit why the universe exists thing and this kind of concept of truly adds and and you know places in there representing our perception of the universe and so on one of the weird consequences is.
If the universe exists mathematics must also exist.
And that's a weird thing because mathematics people have been very confused including me have been very confused about the the question of kind of what.
What is the foundation of mathematics what is what kind of a thing is mathematics is mathematics something
where we just write down axioms like Euclid did for geometry and we just build the structure and we could have written down different accents I mean have a different structure
or is it something that has a more fundamental sort of truth to it.
And I have to say is one of these cases where I've long believed that mathematics has a great deal of arbitrariness to it that there are particular axioms that kind of got written down by the Babylonians.
And you know that's what we've ended up with the mathematics that we have.
And I have to say actually my my wife has been telling me for 25 years she was a mathematician she's been telling me you're wrong about the foundations of mathematics and you know I'm like no no no I know what I'm talking about and finally she's much more right.
Then then I've been so it's one of those so I mean her sense and your sense I we just so this is the question of metamathematics so we just kind of uninsured directory through.
Rule your space except in mathematics through trajectory of certain kind of think that is partly the idea so so I think that the notion is this so 100 years ago little bit more than 100 years ago,
but people have been doing mathematics for ages but then in the in the late 1800's people decided to try and formalize Mathematics and say
you know it is mathematics is you know we're going to break it down we're going to make it like logic we're going to make it out of out of sort of fundamental Primitives,
and that was people like frager and piano and Hilbert and so on and they kind of got this idea
of let's do kind of Euclid but even better let's just make everything just in terms of this sort of symbolic axioms and then build up mathematics from that and that you know they thought at the time as soon as they get.
These symbolic axioms that they made the same mistake that kind of computational irreducibility mistake they thought as soon as we've written down the axioms
then it'll just we'll just have a machine kind of a super Mathematica so to speak that can just grind out all truth in terms of mathematics.
That got exploded by girdles theorem which is basically the story of computational irreducibility it's that even though you know those underlying rules
you can't deduce all the consequences in any finite way and so so that was but now the question is okay so they broke mathematics down into these axioms.
And they say now you build up from that so what I'm increasingly coming to realize is,
that's similar to saying let's take a gas and break it down into molecules.
Does gas laws that are the large-scale structure and so on that we humans are familiar with and then there's the underlying molecular Dynamics and I think that the axiomatic level of mathematics,
which we can access with automated theorem proving and proof assistants and these kinds of things that's the molecular dynamics of mathematics,
and occasionally we see through to that molecular Dynamics we see undecidability we see other things like this one of the things I've always found very mysterious.
Is that Google's theorem shows that there are sort of things which cannot be finitely proved in mathematics there are proofs of arbitrary length.
Infinite length proofs that you might need but in Practical mathematics mathematicians don't typically run into this.
They just happily go along doing that mathematics and I think what's actually happening is that what they're doing is they're looking at.
This they are essentially observers in meta mathematical space and they are picking a reference frame in metal mathematical space.
And they are computationally bounded observers a mathematical space which is causing them to deduce the laws of matter mathematics,
on the laws of mathematics like the laws of fluid mechanics are much more understandable.
Done this underlying molecular Dynamics and so what gets really bizarre is thinking about kind of the analogy between metamathematics this idea of of you exist in this kind of.
In the sort of space of possible.
In this kind of mathematical space where the where the individual kind of points in the mathematical space are statements in mathematics and they're connected by proofs.
Well one statement you know you take a couple of different statements you can use those to prove some other statement and you've got this whole network of proofs,
that's the kind of causal network of mathematics of what can prove what and so on and you can say at any moment
in the history of mathematician of a single mathematical Consciousness you are in a single kind of slice.
Of this kind of meta mathematical space you you know a certain set of mathematical statements you can then deduce with proofs you can deduce other ones and so on your kind of gradually moving through matter mathematical space.
And so it's kind of the view is that the reason that mathematicians
perceive mathematics to have the sort of integrity and lack of kind of undecidability and so on that they do is because they like we as as observers the physical Universe we have these limitations associated with computational boundedness angle for out of time
Consciousness limitations basically that the same thing is true of mathematicians perceiving sort of meta mathematical space and so what's happening is.
When you look at if you look at one of these formalized mathematics systems something like you know Pythagoras Theorem it'll be it'll take Co I don't know.
What is it maybe 10,000 individual little steps to prove Pythagoras Theorem
I'm one of the bizarre things that's a sort of an empirical fact that I'm trying to understand a little bit better if you look at different proof assist if you look at different formulas mathematics systems they actually have different axioms underneath but they can all proof Pythagoras Theorem.
And so in other words it's a little bit like what happens with gases we can have air molecules we can have water molecules but they still have fluid dynamics both of them have fluid dynamics and so similarly at the level that mathematics that mathematicians care about mathematics.
It's way above the macular dinamics so to speak.
And they're all kinds of weird things like for example one thing I was realizing recently as the quantum theory of mathematics that's a very bizarre idea but basically when you prove what is you know a proof.
Is you got one statement in mathematics you go through other statements eventually get to a statement you're trying to prove for example that's a pass the path and met a mathematical space and that's a single path a single proof is a single path.
But you can imagine there are other proofs of the same results there are a bundle of proofs,
that's this whole set of possible prohibit because think of as branching similar to the quantum mechanics model that you were talking about exactly and so and then there's someone variance that you can formalize and then the same way that you can for the quantum mechanical right so the question is in proof space
you know as you start thinking about multiple proofs,
although analogs of for example destructive interference of multiple processor has a bizarre idea that's just a couple of days old so it's not not yet fully formed but as you try and do that when you have two different proofs,
it's like two photons going in different directions you have to proof switch at an intermediate stage are incompatible and that's kind of like destructive interference is it possible for this to instruct the engineering of automated
proof systems a salute as a practical matter I mean that you know this whole question in fact Jonathan God has a nice heuristic for automated theorem provers
that's based on our physics project that is looking for essentially using.
Kind of using energy and in our models energy is kind of level of activity in this hypergraph.
And so that's sort of a heuristic for automated theorem proving about how do you pick which path to go down that is based on essentially physics.
I mean the thing that gets interesting about this is is the way that one consider how the interplay between like for example a black hole what is a black hole in metamathematics.
So the answer is
what is black hole in physics a black hole in physics is where in the simplest form a black hole time ends that is all you know everything is crunched down to the SpaceTime Singularity and everything just ends up at that singularity.
So in our models,
that's a little hard to understand General tivity with continuous mathematics and what is the similarity look like in our models it's something very pragmatic it's just you're applying these rules time is moving forward and then there comes a moment where the rules no rules apply,
so time stops it's kind of like the universe dies then you know the nothing happens in the universe anymore well in mathematics that's a decidable theory.
That's a theory so theories which have undecidability which are things like arithmetic set theory all the serious models,
there is a mathematics they all have the feature that there are proofs of arbitrarily long length in something like Boolean algebra which is a decidable theory.
There are you know any question in Boolean algebra you can just go crunch crunch crunch and then knowing number of steps you can answer it.
You know satisfiability you know might be hard but it's still a bounded number of steps to answer any satisfiability problem.
And so that's the notion of a black hole in physics where time stops.
That's the that's analogous to in mathematics where there aren't infinite length proofs where when in physics.
You know you can wander around the universe forever if you don't run into a black hole if you run into a black hole and time stops you're done and it's the same thing in mathematics between decidable decidable theories and undecidable theories that's a it's an example and I think
we're sort of the temp to understand so another question is kind of what is the what is the general relativity of.
Of metamathematics what is the bulk theory of matter mathematics so in the literature mathematics there about 3 million theorems that people have published.
And those represent,
it's kind of on this it's like like on the earth we would be you know you know we've put cities in particular places on the Earth but yet there is ultimately you know we know the Earth is roughly spherical
and there's an underlying space and we could just talk about you know the world of space in terms of where our cities happened to be but there's actually an underlying space.
And so the question is what's that for metamathematics and as we kind of explore what is for example for mathematics which is always likes taking some abstract limits so an obvious abstract limit for mathematics to take is the limit of the future of.
That is it will be you know the ultimate structure of mathematics yeah and one of the things that's an empirical observation about mathematics,
that's quite interesting is that a lot of theories in one area of mathematics algebraic geometry or something might have they play into another area of mathematics.
That same the same kind of fundamental construct seem to occur in very different areas of mathematics and that structurally captured a bit with category Theory and things like that.
But I think that there's probably an understanding of this matter mathematical space that will explain why different areas of mathematics ultimately sort of map into the same thing,
and I mean my little challenge to myself is what's time dilation in mathematics.
Other words as you as you basically As you move around in this mathematical space of possible statements you know what's how does that moving around it's basically what's happening is.
As you move around in the space of mathematical statements it's like you're changing from algebra geometry to whatever else and you're trying to prove the same theorem
but as you try if you keep on moving to these different places,
it's slower to prove that theorem because you keep on having to translate what you're doing yeah back to where you started from and that's kind of the beginnings of the analog of time dilation amount of mathematics plus there's probably fractional dimensions in this space as well.
The space is a very messy space the space is much messier than physical space I mean even in even in the models of physics.
Physical space is very tame compared to bronchial space and Royal space.
I mean the mathematical structure bronze Shields space probably more like Hilbert space but it's a rather complicated Hilbert space and Rule space.
Is more like this weird Infinity groupoid story of growth and Deacon and I can explain that a little bit because in you know in mathematical space.
A apothem medical articles basis of is a,
a path between two statements as a way to get by proofs is to way to find a proof that goes from one statement to another and so one of the things you can do you can think about is you've got between statements you've got proofs.
They are pause between statements okay so now you can go to the next level and you can ask what about a mapping from one proof to another.
And so that's in in category Theory that's kind of a higher category that notion of higher categories where your you're mapping not just between not just between objects but you're mapping between the mappings between objects and so on.
And so you can keep doing that and you keep saying higher-order proofs I want mappings between proofs between proofs and so on.
And that limiting structure oh by the way one thing that's very interesting is Imagine improve space you've got these two proofs and the question is what is the topology of proof space.
In other words if you take these two paws
can you continuously deform them into each other or is there some big hole in the middle that prevents you from continuously deforming them one into the other it's kind of like
you know when you when you think about some I don't know some puzzle for example you're moving pieces around on some puzzle and you can think about the space of possible states of the puzzle and you can make this graph that shows from one state of the puzzle to another state of the puzzle and so on
and sometimes you can easily get from one state to any other state but sometimes they'll be a hole in that space and they'll be you know you always have to go around the Securitas route.
To get from here to that there won't be any direct way that's kind of a question of whether there is sort of an obstruction in the space and so the question is improve space What is the what are.
You know what does it mean if there's an obstruction in proof space yeah I don't even know what an obstruction means improved space because 40 be an obstruction should be reachable some other way from some other place.
Well this is like on an unreachable part of the graph.
No it's not just an unreachable part it's a part where there are paths that go one way there are parts that go the other way and this question of Home atop in mathematics is this question can you continuously deform.
You know from one path to another path or do you have to go in a jump so to speak so okay so it's like that if you're going around a sphere for example if you're going around us I don't know.
A cylinder or something you can wind around one way.
And you can there's no the paths where you can where you can easily deform One path into another because it's just sort of sitting on the same side of the cylinder
but when you've got something that wins all the way around a cylinder you can't continuous the deform that down to a point because it's stuck wrapped around my intuition about proof spaces you should be able to deform it I mean that
because then otherwise it doesn't make sense because if the topology matters of the way you move about the space that I don't even know what that means well what it would mean is
that you would have one way of doing a proof of something over here in algebra and another way of doing a proof of something over here in geometry.
And there would not be an intermediate way to map between those proofs for how would that be possible if they start at the same place and the same place.
Well it's the same thing as you know we've got points on a you know if we've got paws on a cylinder now I understand how it works in physical space but it just doesn't it feels like proof space shouldn't have that
okay I mean I'm not sure I don't know we'll know very soon because we get to do some experiments this is the great thing about this stuff is that in fact
you know I'm in the next few days I hope to do a bunch of experiments on this so you're playing like proofs and in this kind of space yes
yes I mean so this is toy,
you know theories and you know we've got good so this kind of segues to perhaps another thing which is this whole idea of multi computation so this this summer.
Is another kind of bigger idea that so okay this has to do with how do you make models of things and it's going to it's some so.
I've sort of claim that they've been sort of for epochs,
in the history of making models of things and and that this multi computation thing is the fourth is a new Epoch what are the first three.
The first one is is back in Antiquity ancient Greek times.
People were like what's the universe made of oh it's made of you know everything is water thales you know where everything is made of atoms.
It's sort of what are things made of or the you know there are these Crystal spheres that represent where the planets are and so on it's like a structural idea of how the universe is constructed.
There's no real notion of Dynamics is just what is the universe how is the universe made.
Then we got to the 1600s and we get to the sort of revolution of mathematics being introduced into physics and then.
We have this kind of idea of you write down some equation the what happens in the universe is the solving of that equation time enters but it's usually just a parameter we just can you know sort of slide it,
back and forth and say his word is okay then we come to this kind of computational idea.
That I kind of started really pushing in the in the 90s early 1980s as a result you know the things we were talking about before about complexity that was my motivation,
but the bigger story was the story of kind of computational models of things and the big difference there from the mathematical models is a mathematical models there's an equation you solve it you go to kind of slide time to the place where you want it,
in computational models you give the rule and then you just say go run the rule.
And time is not something you get to slide timers something where it just you run the rule time goes in steps,
and that's how you work out what how the system behaves you don't time is not just a parameter time is something that is about the running of these of these rules.
And so there's this computational error disability You Can't Jump Ahead in time,
but the still important thing is there's still one thread of time it's still the case you know the cellular automaton State then it has the next state and the next state and so on.
The thing that is kind of with sort of tipped off by quantum mechanics in a sense although it it actually feeds back even entered relativity and things like that that,
does these multiple threads of time and so in this multi computation Paradigm the kind of idea is,
instead of that being the single thread of time there are these kind of distributed asynchronous threads of time that are happening and the thing that's sort of different there.
Is if you want to know what happened if you say what happened in the.
And the case of the computational Paradigm you just say well after Thousand Steps we got this result.
But in the multi computational Paradigm after 1000 steps not even clear what 1000 steps means it's got all these different threads of time but there is no state.
There's all these different possible you know there's all these different paths and so the only way you can know what happened is to have some kind of Observer who is saying here's how to parse.
The results of what was going on.
Wrap that observers embedded and they don't have a complete picture so in the case of physics that's right yes and the but that's but so the idea is that in this multi computation setup.
That it's this idea of these multiple threads of time and models that are based on that.
And this is similar to what people think about a non-deterministic computation so you have a turing machine usually it has a definite state it follows another state follows another state.
But typically what people have done when they thought about these kinds of things is they've said well there are all these possible paths a non-deterministic turing machine,
can follow all these possible paths but we just want one of them we just want the one that's the winner that factors the number or whatever else and similarly and it's the same story in logic programming and so on but we say we've got this goal.
Find us a path to that goal I just want one path and I'm happy or theorem proving same story I just want one proof and then I'm happy.
What's happening in multi computation and physics is we actually care about many paths.
And well there is a case for example probabilistic programming is a version of multi computation in which you're looking at all the paths you just asking for probabilities of things.
Um but in a sense and physics were taking different kinds of samplings for example in quantum mechanics we're taking a different kind of sampling of all these multiple paths.
But the thing that is notable is that when you are when you're an observer embedded in this thing etc etc etc with various other sort of footnotes and so on.
It is inevitable that the thing that you parse out of the system looks like general relativity and quantum mechanics.
In other words that just by the very structure of this multi computational setup.
It inevitably is the case that you have certain emergent laws now why is this perhaps not surprising.
Onyx and statistical mechanics there are sort of inevitable emergent laws.
Of set of gas dynamics that are independent of the of the details of the molecular Dynamics sort of the same kind of thing but I think what happens is what sort of a funny thing that I just been understanding very recently is.
When when I kind of introduced this whole sort of computational Paradigm complexity is thing back in the 80s it was kind of like a big Downer because it's like there's a lot of stuff you can't say about what systems will do.
And then what I realized is and then you might say now we've got multi computation it's even worse you know it doesn't just one thread of time that we can't explain it's all these threads of time we can't explain anything.
But the following thing happens because there is all this irreducibility and any detailed thing you might want to answer it's very hard to answer.
But when you have an observer who has certain characteristics like computational boundedness sequentiality of time and so on that Observer.
Only sample certain aspects of this incredible complexity going on in this multi computational system and that Observer is sensitive only to some underlying core structure of this multi computational system,
there is all this irreducible computation going on all these details but to that kind of Observer,
what's important is only the core structure of multi computation which means that Observer observes comparatively simple laws.
And I think it is inevitable that that Observer observes laws which are mathematically structured like general relativity and quantum mechanics
which by the way are the same law in our in our model of physics so that's an explanation why there's simple laws that explain a lot for this Observer.
Potentially yes but what the the place where this gets really interesting is they're all these fields of science.
What people have kind of gotten stuck where they say we'd really love to have a physics like theory of Economics we'd really love to have a physics like law and Linguistics is that and talk about molecular biology here
okay so where does multi competition come in for biology economics is super interesting to but biology let's talk about that so let's talk about chemistry for a second
okay so I mean I have to say you know this is such a weird business for me because you know they're these kind of paradigmatic ideas and then that the actual application
and it's like I've always said I know nothing about chemistry I learned all the chemistry I know you know the night before some exam when I was 14 years old yeah but I've actually learned a bunch more chemistry and in and Wolfram language these days we have really pretty nice symbolic representation of chemistry
and in understanding the design of that I've actually I think learn to set them out of chemistry,
stuff you quiz me on sort of basic high school chemistry I would probably totally fail but but but okay so what is chemistry,
I mean chemistry is sort of a story of chemical reactions,
like you've got this particular chemical it's represented as some graph of you know these are these are this configuration of molecules with these bonds and so on and the chemical reaction happens you've got these sort of two graphs,
they interact in some way you've got another graph for multiple other graphs out so that's kind of the the sort of the,
the abstract view of what's happening in chemistry and so when you do a chemical synthesis for example you are given certain sort of these are possible reactions that can happen.
And your ass can you piece together.
This a sequence of such reactions a sequence of such sort of axiomatic reactions usually called name reactions and chemistry can you piece together a sequence of these reactions so that you get out at the end
this great molecule you were trying to synthesize and so that's a story very much like theorem proving.
And people have done actually they start in the 1960s looking at that kind of the theorem proving approach to that although it didn't really it didn't it didn't sort of done too early I think
but anyway so that's kind of the view is that that chemistry chemical reactions of this story of all these different sort of Paths of possible,
things that go on okay let's go to an even lower level.
Let's say instead of asking about which species of molecules were talking about let's look at individual molecules.
And let's say we're looking at individual molecules and they are having chemical reactions and we're building up this big graph of all these reactions that are happening.
Okay so so then we've got this big graph and by the way that big graph is incredibly similar to this hypergraph rewriting things.
In fact in the underlying theory of multi computation there these things we call token event graphs which are basically you've broken your state into tokens,
like in the case of hypergraph you broken it into hyper edges and each event is just consuming some number of tokens and producing some number of tokens but then you have to there's a lot of work to be done in update rules.
In terms of what they actually offer chemistry yeah but they are for our observed chemistry yes indeed
yes indeed we've been working on that actually because we have this beautiful system and Wolfram language for representing chemistry symbolically so we actually have,
you know this is a this is an ongoing thing to actually figure out what they offer some practical cases does that require human injection or can it be automatically discovered
these update rules well if we can enable our mystery battery probably discover them automatically but I think in reality right now it's like there are these particular reactions and I really to understand what's going on we're probably going to pick a particular subtype
of chemistry and just because we let me explain where this is going this is the place that his where this is going so.
Got this whole network of all these molecules are having all these reactions and so on and this is some whole multi computational story because each.
Each sort of chemical reaction event.
Is its own separate event we're saying they all happen asynchronously we're not describing in what order they happen you know maybe that order is governed by some quantum mechanics thing doesn't really matter we're just saying they happen in some order and then we.
What is the what's the you know how do we think about the system well this thing is some kind of big multi computational system the question is what is the chemical Observer.
And one possible chemical Observer is all you care about is did you make that particular drug molecule.
It just asking you know the for the One path another thing you might care about is I want to know the concentration of each species.
But I want to know you know at every stage I'm going to solve the differential equations that represent the concentrations and I want to know what those all are but there's more because when and it's kind of like you're going below and statistical mechanics.
That's kind of all these molecules bouncing around and you might say we just going to ignore we're just going to look at the aggregate.
Densities of certain kinds of molecules but you can look at a lower level you can look at this whole graph a possible interactions.
And so the kind of the idea would be what you know is the only chemical Observer.
One who just cares about overall concentrations or can there be a chemical Observer who cares about this network of what happened.
And so that the question then is so let me give an analogy so this is where I think this is potentially very relevant to molecular molecular biology and molecular computing.
When we think about a computation usually we say its input its output we you know what chemistry we say there's this input we're going to make this molecule as the out.
But what if what we actually encode whatever computation what are the thing we care about is some part of this Dynamic Network.
What if it isn't just the input and output that we care about what if there's some dynamics of the network that we care about now imagine you're a chemical Observer.
What is the chemical Observer well in molecular biology.
There are all kinds of weird sorts of observers there are membranes that exist that have you know different kinds of molecules that can bind to them things like this it's not obvious that the
from a human scale we just measure the concentration of something is the relevant story we can imagine that,
for example when we look at this whole network of possible reactions we can imagine you know to physical level we can imagine what was the actual momentum direction of that of that molecule,
what was which we don't pay any attention to when we just talking about chemical concentrations what was the orientation of that molecule these kinds of things.
And so here's the his the place where I'm have a little suspicion okay so one of the questions in biology is what matters in biology.
And that is you know we have all these chemical reactions we have all these all these molecular processes going on in you know in biological systems what matters.
And you know one of the things is.
To be able to tell what matters well so a big story of the what matters question was what happened in genetics in 1953 when DNA was figured out how DNA worked.
Because before that time you know genetics have been all these different effects and complicated things and then it was realized ah there's something new a molecule can store information which wasn't obvious before that time,
a single molecule can store information so there's a place where there can be something important that's happening in microbiology and it's just in the sequence that storing information in a molecule so the possibility now is
imagine this Dynamic Network.
This you know causal graphs and multi-way causal graphs and so on that represent all of these different reactions between molecules what if there is some aspect of that,
that is storing information that's relevant for my field of biology in the dynamic aspect of that yes that's right so that it's similar to how the structure of a DNA molecule.
Stores information they could be the Dynamics of the system stores information and this kind of process might allow you to give predictions of what that
would be well yes but we also imagine that you're trying to do for example imagine you're trying to do molecular computation.
Okay you might think the way we're going to do molecular computation is we're just going to run the thing we're going to see what came out we're going to see what molecule came out.
This is saying that's not the only thing you can do there is a different kind of chemical Observer that you can imagine constructing which is somehow
sensitive to this Dynamic Network exactly how that works how we make that measurement I don't know but a few ideas but that's what's important so to speak.
And that that means and by the way you can do the same thing even for Turing machines you can say if you have a multi way turing machine you can say how do you compute with a multi-way turing machine.
You cut you can't say well we got this input and this output because the thing has all these threads of time it's got lots of outputs and so then you say well what does it even mean to be a universal multi-way turing machine I don't fully know the answer to that,
it had an interesting idea freak touring out for sure because then the Dynamics of the the trajectory of the competition matters.
Yes yes I mean but the thing is that that so this is again a story of what's the Observer so to speak and chemistry what's the Observer there,
now to give an example of where that might matter very sort of present-day example is in Immunology.
Well you know we have whatever it is you know ten billion different kinds of antibodies that are
you know all these different shapes and so on we have I'm a trillion different kinds of T-cell receptors that we can that we produce and you know the traditional theory of Immunology
is this clonal selection Theory where we are constantly producing randomly producing all these different antibodies and as soon as one of them is binds to an antigen then that one gets Amplified and we produce more of that antibody and so on
um back in the 1960s I mean ologist called meals you know who is the guy who invented monoclonal antibodies various other things
kind of had this network theory of the immune system where it will be like what we produce antibodies but then we produce antibodies to the antibodies antibodies and we produce antibodies and we get this whole dynamic network of interactions between different immune system cells.
And that was that that was kind of a qualitative Theory at that time and it's I've been a little disappointed cuz I've been studying and enology a bit recently,
and I knew something about this like 35 years ago or something and I knew you know I read a bunch of the books and I talked to a bunch of the people and so on and it was like an emerging theoretical Immunology world.
And then I look at the books now and they're very thick because they've got you know there's just a ton known about Immunology.
And you know all these different Pathways all these different details and so on but the theoretical section seemed to have shrunk.
And so it's some so the question is what,
you know for example immune memory where is the where does the immune memory reside is it actually some cells sitting in our bone marrow that is you know living for the whole of Our Lives that's going to spring into action as soon as we're showing the same antigen.
Or is it something different from that is it something more dynamic.
Is it something more like some network of interactions between these different kinds of immune systems cells and so on and it's known that there are plenty of interactions between T cells and you know there's plenty of Dynamics but what the consequence of that Dynamics is not clear.
And to have a qualitative theory for that doesn't,
it doesn't seem to exist in fact I was just just been trying to study this so I'm quite incomplete in my study of these things but I was a little bit taken aback because I've been looking at these things and it's like and then they get to the end where they have the most advanced theory that they've got,
and it turns out it's a cellular automaton Theory it's like okay well at least I understand that theoria but but you know I think that the possibility is.
That in numb.
This is a place where if you want to know you know explain roughly how the immune system works it ends up being the stuff Dynamic Network and then the the you know the immune Consciousness so to speak The Observer.
Ends up being something that you know in the end it's kind of like does the human get sick or whatever.
It's a it's something which is a complicated story that relates to this whole sort of dynamic Network and so on and I think that's another place where this kind of notion of where I think multi computation has the possibility.
See one of the things okay you can end up with something where yes there is a general acidity in that there but it turns up but it may turn out that the Observer.
Who sees general relativity in the immune system,
is an observer that's relevant to what we care about about the immune system I mean it could be yes there is some effect where you know there's some you know
time dilation of T-cells interacting with whatever but it's like that's an effect that's just irrelevant and the thing we actually care about is things about you know.
What happens when you have a vaccine that goes into some place and shape space and,
you know how does that affect other places in shape space and how does that spread you know what's the what's the analog of the speed of light and shape space for example that's and that's an important issue if you have one of these Dynamic theories it's like you you know you'll poke into shapes,
by having you know let's say a vaccine or something that has a particular configuration in shape space how how quickly as this Dynamic Network spreads out.
How quickly do you get,
sort of other antibodies in different places and shapes place things like that when you see a shape space in the shape of the molecules or though the and then so this is like.
Could be deeply connected to the protein and multi protein folding all of that kind of stuff so to be able to say something interesting about the dance of proteins that right exactly then actually has an impact on.
Helping develop drugs for example or has an impact on biology Immunology helping but I think that's the big thing is you know when we think about molecular biology.
The you know what what is the qualitative way to think about it,
in other words is it chemical reaction networks is it you know genetics you know DNA.
Big you know big news it's kind of there's a digital aspect of the whole thing you know what is the qualitative way to think about how things work in biology.
You know when we think about I don't know some phenomenon like aging or something there's a big complicated phenomenon which just seems to have all these different tentacles is it really the case that that can be thought about in some you know without DNA when people were describing
you know genetic phenomena there were you know dominant-recessive this that and the other got very very complicated.
And then people realize oh it's just you know and what is a gene and so on and so on and so on then people realize it's just base pairs and there's this digital representation and so the question is what is the overarching representation,
that we can now start to think about using a microbiology I don't know how this will work out and this is again one of these things,
we're and the place where that gets important is you know maybe molecular biology is doing molecular Computing by using some Dynamic process
that is something where it is very happily saying oh I just got a result it's in the dynamic structure of this network now I'm going to go and do some other thing based on that result for example but we're like oh I don't know what's going on you know it's just we just measured them levels of these
chemicals and we couldn't conclude anything but it just we're looking at the wrong thing and so that's the that's kind of the the
the potential there and it's I mean these things are I don't know it's for me it's like I've not really
that was not a view I mean I've thought about molecular Computing for ages and ages and ages and I've always imagined,
that the big story is kind of the original promise of nanotechnology of like can we make a molecular scale Constructor that will just build build a molecule in any shape
but I don't think I'm now increasingly concluding that's not the big point the big point is something more dynamic
that will be an interesting endpoint for any of these things but that's perhaps not.
The thing you know because the one example we have molecular Computing that's really working is US biological organisms and you know maybe the thing that's important there is not,
this you know what chemicals do you make so to speak but more this kind of dynamic process that Eric process and then you can have a good model like the hyper grafted to then explore.
What likes simulated again make predictions and if they think just have a way to reason about biology I mean it's hard you know but first of all biology doesn't have theories like physics.
You know physics is a much more successful sort of global Theory kind of kind of area.
You know biology what are the global theories of biology pretty much darwinian Evolution that's the only Global theory of biology.
You know other any other theory is just a well the kidneys work this way the this thing works this way and so on,
there isn't a I suppose another Global theories digital information in DNA that's another sort of global fact about violence but the difficult thing to do is to match.
Something you have a model of in the hypergraph to the actual like how do you discover the theory
how do you how do you discover the theory okay you have something that looks nice and makes sense but like you have to match it to validation and oh sure right and that's tricky because you're walking around in the dark.
Not entirely I mean so so you know for example in what we've been trying to think about is take actual chemical reactions okay so you know one of my one of my goals is can I compute the primes with molecules okay that's if I can do that.
Then I kind of
maybe I can compute things and you know there's this nice automated lab these guys is Emerald Cloud lab people have built with Wolfram language and so on that's an actual physical lab,
and you send it a piece of Wolfram language code and it goes and you know actually does physical experiments and so one of my,
one of my goals because I'm not a test tube kind of guy more of a software kind of person is can I make something where you know in this automated lab we can actually get it so that there's some gel that we made
and you know the positions of the stripes of the primes I love it yeah I mean that would be that would be an example of where and that would be with a particular.
You know framework for actually doing the molecular Computing you know with particular kinds of molecules and and there's a lot of kind of ambient.
Technological mess so to speak associated with oh is it carbon is it this is it that you know is it important that there's a bromine atom here etc etc etc this is all chemistry that I don't know much about and you know that's that's a sort of
you know unfortunately that's down at the level you know I would like to be at the software level
not at the level of the transistors so to speak but in chemistry you know there's a certain amount we have to do I think at the level of transistors before we get up to being able to do it although you know automated Labs certainly help in setting that up.
I talked to a guy named Charles hoskinson he mentioned that he's collaborating with you.
He's an interesting guy he sends me papers on speaking of automated theorem proving a lot he's exceptionally well right on that area as well so what's the nature of your collaboration with him he's the creator of cardano what's the nature of the color collaboration between
cardano and the hole spacer Block Chain and Wolfram Wolfram Alpha will from blockchain all that kind of stuff well okay we're segueing to it.
A slightly different world but that time so although not completely unconnected right there the whole thing is somehow connected as I know I'm the the
you know the strange thing in my life as I've sort of alternated between doing basic science and doing technology about five times in my life so far and the thing that's just crazy about it is you know every time
I do one of these alternations I think.
There's not going to be a way back to the other thing like I thought for this physics project I thought you know we're doing fundamental Theory of physics maybe it'll have an application in 200 years.
But now I've realized.
Actually this multi computation idea is applicable here and now it's an in fact it's also giving us this way I'll just mention one other thing and then with to talk about blockchain the.
The question of actually that relates to several different things but but one of the things about about Okay so.
Our Wolfram language which is our attempt to kind of represent everything in the world computationally.
And that's the thing I kind of started building 40 years ago in the form of actual Wolfram language 35 years ago it's kind of this idea of can we can we express things about the world in computational terms.
And you know we've come a long way and being able to do that
Wolfram Alpha is kind of the consumer version of that way you're just using natural language as input the and it turns it into our symbolic language and that's you know the symbolic language Wolfram language is what people abused and have been using for the last 33 years actually
Mathematica which is its first instantiation will be one third of a century old in in October and that.
It's kind of interesting what do you mean 1/3 of a centuries I mean 33 or 30 what do we have 3 of 13 in the third.
Um so but I've never heard of anyone celebrating that anniversary but I liked it I know a third of a century though it's like yeah I'll get many many slices of a century that interesting but but you know I think that the.
The thing that's really striking about that is that means you know including the whole sort of Technology Stack Up built around that's about 40 years old.
And that means it's a significant fraction of the total age of the computer industry and it's I mean I think it's cool that we can still run you know mathematical version 1 programs.
Today and so on and we've sort of maintain compatibility and we've been just building this big tower.
All those years of just more and more and more computational capabilities it's sort of interesting we just made this this picture
of kind of the different kind of threads of computational content of you know mathematical content and and you know
all sorts of things with you know data and graphs and whatever else and what you see in this picture is about the first ten years it's kind of like it's just a few threads and then
then about maybe 15 20 years ago it kind of explodes in this whole collection different threads of all these different capabilities that are now part of Wolfram language and representing different things in the world.
But the thing that was super Lucky in some sense is it's all based on one idea.
It's all based on the idea of symbolic expressions and transformation rules for symbolic Expressions which was kind of what I originally put into this SMP system back in 1979 that was a predecessor of the whole Wolfram language stack.
So that idea was an idea that I got,
from sort of trying to understand mathematical logic and so on it was my attempt to kind of make a general human comprehensible model of computation of just everything is a symbolic expression and all you do is transform symbolic expressions.
And you know in retrospect I was very lucky that I understood as little as I understood then.
Because had I understood more I would have been completely freaked out about all the different ways that that kind of model can fail.
Because what do you do when you have a symbolic expression you make Transformations for symbolic Expressions well for example one question is there may be many Transformations that could be made in a very multi computational kind of way.
But what we're doing is picking will using the First Transformation that applies and we keep doing that until we reach a fixed point and that's the result.
And that's kind of a very it's kind of a way of sort of sliding around the edge of multi computation and back when I was working on SMP and things I actually thought about these questions about about how,
you know how what determines the kind of evaluation path.
So for example you know you work out Fibonacci you know Fibonacci is recursive thing for then is f of n minus 1 plus FN minus 2 you get this whole tree of recursion.
And there's the question of how do you evaluate that tree of recursion do you do it.
Sort of depth first we go all the way down one side you do it breadth-first where your kind of collecting the terms together but you know that you know F of a plus F of 7 F of 7 plus 7 6 you can collect the F of sevens and so on
these are you know I didn't realize it at the time it's kind of funny I was working on on gauge field there is back in 1979 and was also working on the evaluation model.
And that's MP under the same problem but it took me 40 more years to realize that.
And this question about how you do this sort of evaluation front that's a question of reference frames it's a question of kind of the story of I mean that that's that is basically this question of in what order is the universe evaluated
and that's a and so what you realize is there's this whole sort of world of different kinds of computation that you can do sort of multi computationally and that's a that's an interesting thing it has a lot of implications for distributed computing and so on
it also has a potential implication for blockchain which we haven't fully worked out.
Which is some and this is not what we're doing with cardano but this is a different thing the.
This is something where one of the questions is when you have.
In a sense blockchain is a deeply sequentialized story of time because in blockchain there's just one copy of the of The Ledger and you're saying this is what happened.
You know time has progressed in this way and that little things around the edge as as you try and reach consensus and so on and and you know actually we just recently
we've had this little conference we organized about the theory of distributed consensus because I realized that a bunch of interesting things that some of our science can tell one about that but that's a different let's not go down that
that part yeah but distributed consensus that still has a sequential there's like they stole sequentiality so you do don't tell me you're thinking through like how to apply multi computation to,
Dolce yes and so that becomes a story of.
You know instead of transactions all having to settle in one Ledger it's like a story of all these different Ledger's and they all have to have some ultimate consistency.
Which is what causal invariance would give one but it can take a while and the it can take awhile is kind of like quantum mechanics.
So it's kind of what's happening is that these different Paths of history that correspond to you know and one path of History you got paid this amount in another part of History you got paid this amount in the end
the universe will always become consistent now now the way it works is.
Okay it's a little bit more complicated than that what happens is the way space is knitted together in our Theory of physics is through all these events and the the idea is,
that the way that economic space is knitted together is,
is that these autonomous events that essentially knit together economic space so they're all these threads of transactions that are happening and the question is can they be made consistent are there is there something forcing them to be sort of a consistent,
fabric of economic reality and sort of what this has led me to is trying to realize how does economics fundamentally work.
And you know what is economics and you know what are the atoms of Economics right so to speak,
and so what I've kind of realized is that that sort of the perhaps I don't even know if this is right yet there's sort of events in economics the transactions.
There are states of agents that are kind of the atoms of economics and then transactions are kind of Agents.
Transact and something transaction somewhere and that's an event and then the question is how do you knit together sort of economic space from that.
What is their economic space well all these transactions there's a whole complicated collection of possible transactions but one thing that's true about economics as we tend to have the notion of a definite value for things we could imagine,
that you know you buy a cookie from somebody and they want to get a movie ticket.
And there is some way that AI Bots could make some path from the cookie to the movie ticket by all these different trans intermediate transactions.
But in fact we have an approximation to that which is we say they each have a dollar value and we have this kind of numeraire concept.
Of this just a way of kind of taking this whole complicated space of transactions and parsing it.
And something which is a kind of a simplified thing that is kind of like our parsing of physical space.
And so my guess is that the yet again I mean it's crazy that all these things are so connected this is another multi computation Story another story of where what's happening is that the economic consciousness
the economic Observer is not going to deal with all of those are different microscopic transactions,
they're just going to parse the whole thing by saying that is this value it's a number and that's that's their understanding of their summary,
of this economic Network and there will be all kinds of things like they're all kinds of Arbitrage opportunities which are kind of like the quantum effects and this whole thing.
And that's you know and places where there's with a sort of different paths that can be followed and and so on and there's so.
The question is come one make a sort of global theory of economics and then my test case is again what is time dilation and economics
and I know for you know if you imagine a very agricultural economics where people are growing lettuces and Fields and things like this and you ask questions about well if you're transporting lettuces to different places,
you know what is the value of the lettuces after you have to transport them
versus if you're just sitting in one place and selling them you can kind of get a little bit of an analogy there but I think there's a there's a better and more complete analogy and that there's the question of is there a theory like General activity
that is a global theory of economics and is it about something we care about it could be that there is a global Theory but it's about a feature of economic reality that isn't important to us.
Another part of the story is come one use those ideas to make essentially a distributed blockchain a distributed generalization of blockchain.
Kind of the quantum analog of money so to speak where where you have for example you can have uncertainty relations where you're saying you know well if I insist on knowing my bank account right now.
They'll be some uncertainty if I'm prepared to wait a while then it'll be much more certain.
And so that's you know is there a way of using and so we've made a bunch of prototypes of this which I'm not yet happy with this but I realized is
to really understand these prototypes actually have to have a foundational theory of.
And so that's kind of a you know it may be that we could deploy up one of these prototypes as a practical system but I think it's really going to be much better if we actually have,
an understanding of how this plugs into kind of Economics that means like a fundamental theory of transactions between entities.
Well if that's what you mean by economics,
yes I think so but I mean you know how their emerge sort of laws of Economics I don't even know and I've been asking friends of mine who are who are economists and things what is the economics
is it an axiomatic theory is it a theory that is a kind of a qualitative description theory is that you know what kind of a theory is it is it a theory you know what kind of thinking it's like.
Like an in biology and evolutionary biology for example there's a certain there's a certain pattern of thinking that goes on and evolutionary biology where if you're a you know a good Eeveelution in biologist somebody says that creature has a weird horn,
and they'll say well that's because this and this and this and this selection of this kind in that kind and that's the story.
And it's not a mathematical story it's a story of a different type of thinking about these things by the way evolution in biology is yet another place
well it looks like this multi computational idea can be applied and that's where we're maybe speciation is related to things like event Horizons and as a whole
whole other kind of world of that but because things like this kind of model can be applicable so many.
Specs like I did the different levels of understanding of our reality so it can fix biology at the chemistry at the physics level
right they economics and you could potentially it's the thing is.
It's like okay sure it all these levels in my rhyme it might make sense as a model the question is can you make useful predictions as one of these loving that's that's right and that's that's really a question of,
you know it's a weird situation because the situation where the model.
Probably has definite consequences the question is are there consequences we care about yeah and that's some you know and so,
so in the case of and the economic case the where.
Um so you know the one one thing is this this idea of using kind of physics like Notions to construct a kind of distributed analog blockchain okay the much more pragmatic thing,
is a different direction and it has to do with this computational language that we built to describe the world.
That knows about you know different kinds of cookies and knows about different cities and knows about how to compute all these kinds of things.
One of the things that is of interest is if you want to run the world you need you know with.
With contracts and laws and rules and so on there are rules at a human level and there are kind of things like.
And so this this gets one into the idea of computational contracts right now when we write a contract it's a piece of legalese it's you know it's just written in English and it's not something that's automatically analyzable executable whatever else it's just.
English you know back in.
Gottfried leibniz back in you know 1680 or whatever was like going to you know figure out how to use logic.
To decide legal cases and so on and he had kind of this idea of Let's Make a computational language for the human human law.
Forget about modeling nature forgot about natural laws what about human law can we make kind of a computational representation of that
well I think finally we're close to being able to do that and one of the projects that I hope to get to as soon as the
there's a little bit of slowing down of some of this Cambrian explosion that's happening as a project I've been meaning to really do for a long time which is what I'm calling a symbolic discourse language it is just
finishing the job of being able to represent everything like the conversation we're having in computational terms and one of the use cases for that is computational.
Another use case is something like the Constitution that says what the a is what we want the ai's to do so but this is useful so you saying so these are like using computation contract
the smart contracts this is what's in the domain of cryptocurrency is known as smart contracts and so the language you've developed this symbolic.
Or seek to further develop symbolic discourse language enables you to.
Write a contract in Rosso right contract that really represents the will stop some aspect of the world yeah but so so
I mean smart contracts tend to be right now mostly about things happening on the blockchain
yes sometimes they have oracle's and in fact our Wolfram Alpha API is the main thing people use to get information about the real world so to speak yeah within smart contracts the Wolfram Alpha
as it stands is a really good Oracle yes whoever wants to use it that's perhaps where the relationship with cardano so that's how we started getting involved with blockchains as we realize people are using you know Wolfram Alpha as
the Oracle for smart contract so to speak and so that got us interested in blockchains in general and what was ended up happening is
Wolfram language is with its symbolic representation of things is really very good at representing.
Things like blockchains and so I think we now have them I don't really know all the comparisons but we now have a really nice environment within Wolfram language for dealing with,
the set of
you know for representing what happens in blockchains for analyzing what happens in blockchains we have a whole effort in blockchain analytics and you know we've
sort of published some samples of how that works but but it's you know because our technology stack Wolfram language and Mathematica a very widely used in the Quant Finance world there's a there's a sort of immediate sort of
coevolution their of sort of the Quant Finance kind of thing and blockchain Analytics,
and that's some so so it's kind of the representation of blockchain in computational language.
Then ultimately it's kind of like how do you run the world with code that is how do you write,
sort of all these things which are right now regulations and laws and contracts and things and computational language,
I'm kind of the ultimate vision is that sort of something happens in the world and then there's this giant domino effect of all these computational contracts that trigger based on the thing that happened and there's a there's a whole story to that and of course.
You know I like to always pay attention to the latest things that are going on and I really kind of like Watch chain because it's a
it's a it's another rethinking of kind of computation that's kind of like you know cloud computing was a little bit of that of sort of persistent kind of computational resources and so on
and this multi computation is a big rethinking of kind of what it means to compute.
Blockchain is another bit of rethinking of what it means to compute the idea that you Lodge kind of these autonomous lumps of computation out there in the blockchain world.
And one of the things that just sort of,
for fun so to speak as we've been doing a bit of stuff with n ftes and we just did some entities Uncle Donna and we'll be doing some more and
you know we did some cellular automaton and lefties on Katana words like like quite a bit and you know one of the things I've realized about about NF tease is that there's kind of this notion and we really
working on this you know I like recording stuff you know one of the things that's come out of kind of my science I suppose has this this history matters type.
Type story of you know it's not just the current state it's the history that matters
and I've kind of I don't think this is such and realizing maybe it's not coincidental that I'm sort of the human whose recorded more about themselves than anybody else and then I end up with these science results that say history matters which was not,
those things I didn't think those were connected but Charlie's Coral 80s yeah right so you know this question about sort of recording what has happened.
And and having sort of a permanent record of things one of the things that's kind of interesting there is you know you put up a website and it's got a bunch of stuff on it but you know you have to keep paying the hosting fees or the things going to go away.
One of the things about blockchains quite interesting is if you put something on a blockchain and you pay you know your commission to get that thing you know put on you know mind put on the Block blockchain then then in a sense everybody who comes after you.
Is you know they are motivated to keep your thing alive because that's what keeps the consistency of the blockchain so in a sense with sort of the nft world it's kind of like if you want to have something permanent.
Well at least for the life of the blockchain but even if the blockchain goes out of circulation so to speak.
That's going to be enough value in that whole collection of transactions the people are going to Archive the thing but that means that you know pay once.
And you're kind of you're lodged in the blockchain forever.
And so we've been kind of playing around with a sort of a hobby thing of mine of thinking about sort of the nft he's and how you
I'm sort of the consumer idea of kind of the it's the it's the anti you know the opposite of the Snapchat
view of the world there's a permanence to it this heavily incentivized and thereby you can have a permanence of History.
And that's that's that's kind of the.
Now you know so that's so that's one of the things we've been doing with Cod I know and it's kind of fun I think that that I mean this whole question about you know you mentioned automated theorem proving and blockchains and so on.
And as I thought about this kind of physics inspired distributed blockchain.
Obviously they're the sort of the proof that it works that there no double spends there's no whatever else that proof becomes a very formal,
kind of almost a matter of physics so to speak and you know it's been it's been an interesting thing for the the practical blockchains,
to do kind of actual automated theorem proving and I don't think anybody's really Managed IT an interesting case yet it's a thing that people you know aspire to but I think it's a challenging thing because basically the point is one of the one of the things about,
proving correctness of something as well you know people say I've got this program and I'm going to prove its correct.
It's like what does that mean you have to say what correct means I mean it's it's kind of like then you have to have another language and people are very confused back in past Decades of you know oh we're going to prove the correctness by representing the program in another language.
Which we also don't know whether it's correct and you know Often by correctness we just mean it can't crash or it can't scribble on memory but but the thing is that there's this complicated trade-off.
Because as soon as there's as soon as you're really using computation you have computational error disability you have undecidability if you want to use computation seriously you have to kind of.
Let go of the idea that you're going to be able to box it in and say we're going to have just this happen and not anything else I mean this is a this is an old fact I mean godel's theorem tries to say you know p on arithmetic the axioms of arithmetic.
Can you box in the integers and say these axioms give just the integers and nothing about the integers go to the therm show that wasn't the case there's a you know you can have all these wild weird things that are Bay the piano axioms but aren't integers
and there's this kind of infinite hierarchy of additional axioms you would have to add
and it's kind of the same thing you don't get to you know if you want to say I want to know what happens you're boxing yourself in and there's a limit to what can happen so to speak.
So it's a complicated trade-off and it's a it's a big trade-off for a I so to speak it's kind of like do you want to let computation actually do what it can do or do you want to say no it's very very boxed in to the point where we can understand every step.
And that's a that's kind of a thing that that becomes difficult to do but that's some I mean in general.
I would say one of the things that's kind of complicated in my sort of life in the whole sort of story of computational language and
all this technology and science and so on I mean I kind of in the flow of one's life it's sort of interesting to see how these things play out because I you know I've kind of concluded that I'm in the business of making kind of artifacts from the future.
Which means you know that things that I've done I don't know this physics project I don't know whether anybody would have gotten to it for 50 years.
You know the fact that mathematical is a third of a century old and I know that the bunch of the core ideas are not well absorbed.
I mean that is people finally got this idea that I thought was a triviality of notebooks that was 25 years and you know some of these core ideas about symbolic computation and so on,
not not absorbed I mean people people use them everyday and Wolfram language,
and you know do all kinds of cool things with them but if you say what is the fundamental intellectual Point here it's not well absorbed
and it's something where you kind of realized that you're sort of building things and I kind of made this thing about you know
will building artifacts from the future so to speak and I mentioned that we have a conference every coming up actually in a couple of weeks our annual technology conference where we talk about all the all the things we're doing
and you know so I was talking about it last year about you know we're making artifacts from the future and I was kind of like.
I had some some version of that that was kind of a dark and frustrated thing of like you know
I'm building things which nobody's going to care about until long after I'm dead so to speak but but but then I realized you know people
what was sort of telling me afterwards you know that's exactly how you know we're using Wolfram language in some particular setting and you know some computational X field or some organization or whatever and it's like people are saying
oh you know what did you manage to do
you know what we know that in principle it will be possible to do that but we didn't know that was possible now and it's kind of like that's the that's sort of the business were in a sense with some of these ideas in science.
You know I feel a little bit the same way that there are some of these things where you know some some things like for example this hole
idea well so so to relate to another piece of history on the future one of you know I mentioned mentioned at the beginning kind of complexity as this thing that I was interested in Back 40 years ago and so on where does complexity come from.
Well I think we kind of nailed that.
The answer is in the computational universe even simple programs make it and that's kind of the secret the Nature has that allows you to make it so so that's kind of the
that's that part but the bigger picture there
was this idea of this kind of computational Paradigm the idea that you could go beyond mathematical equations which have been sort of the primary modeling medium for 300 years
and so it was like
look it is inexorably the case that people will use programs rather than just equations and you know I was saying that in the 1980s and people were you know I published my big book new kind of science that will be 20 years ago next year so in 2002
and people are saying oh no this can't possibly be true you know we know for 300 years we've been doing all this stuff right.
To be fair I now realize a little bit more analysis of what people actually said.
And pretty much every field other than physics people said oh these are new models that's pretty interesting and physics,
people will like we've got our physics models we're very happy with them yeah physics there's more resistance because of the attachment and the power of the equations right idea that programs might be the right way to approach right
this field was there's some resistance and like you're saying.
It takes time for somebody who likes the idea of time dilation and all these applications I thought you would understand this yeah right but but you know and computational irreducibility yes exactly but but I mean it is really interesting that just 20 years.
The span of 20 years it's gone from you know pitchforks and horror to yeah we get it and you know it's helped.
That we've you know in our current.
Effort in fundamental physics we've gotten a lot further and we've managed to put a lot of puzzle pieces together that makes sense,
but the thing that I've been thinking about recently is this field of complexity so I kind of was a sort of a field Builder back in the 1980s I was kind of like,
okay you know can we you know I'd understood this point that there was this sort of fundamental phenomenon of complexity and showed up in lots of places and I was like this is an interesting sort of field of science.
And I was recently.
I was reminded I was at this the very first sort of get together of what became the Santa Fe Institute I was like in fact there's even an audio recording of me sort of saying people have been talking about or what should this you know outfit do and I was saying.
Well there is this thing that I've been thinking about it's this kind of idea of complexity a nice and it's kind of like and that's that's what that ended up in a plant is the seat of complexity Santa Fe as beautiful it's a beautiful Vision but but I mean so that but what's happened then.
Is this idea of complexity and you know can you know and I started the first Research Center at University of Illinois for doing that in the first Journal complex systems and so on and it's kind of an interesting thing in my life at least that it's kind of like
you plant the seed you have this idea.
It's a kind of a science idea you have this idea of sort of focusing on the phenomenon of complexity the deeper idea was this computational Paradigm but
the nominal idea is this kind of idea of complexity okay then you roll time forward 30 years or whatever 35 years whatever it is and you say what happened.
Okay well now there are thousand complexity institutes around the world I think more or less we've been trying to count them and you know there are 40 complexity journals I think and so.
It's kind of like what actually happened in this field right and I look at a lot of what happened and I'm like.
You know I have to admit some eye-rolling so to speak because it's kind of like like what is what what's what's actually going on well what people definitely got.
Was this idea of computational models.
And then they got but they thought one of the one of the kind of cognitive mistakes I think is they say we've got a computational model and it.
We're looking at a system that's complex and our computational model gives complexity by golly that must mean it's right.
Unfortunately because complexity is a generic phenomenon and computational irreducibility is a generic phenomenon that actually tells you nothing.
And so then the question is well what can you do you know there's a lot of things that have been sort of done under this Banner of complexity and I think it's been very successful in providing sort of an interdisciplinary
way of connecting different fields together in this powerful in itself right I mean it's a validation economists and yeah it is right and it's an organizing principle but but in the end a lot of that is around the Sun of computational Paradigm computational modeling that's the raw material
the powers that kind of that kind of Correspondence I.
Then the question is sort of what is the you know I was just thinking recently you know we've been I mean the other we've been we've been.
For years people have told me you should start some Wolfram Institute that does basic science you know all I have is a company that.
Build software and we you know we have a little piece that does basic science is kind of a hobby people are saying you should start this Wolfram Institute thing.
And I've been you know because I've known about lots of institutes and I've seen kind of that flow of money and,
and kind of you know what happens in different situations and so on so I've been kind of reluctant but but I
I have realized that you know what we've done with our company over the last 35 years we built a very good machine for doing R&D and you know innovating and creating things and I just
applied that machine to the physics project that's how we did the physics project in a fairly short amount of time with a you know efficient machine with
you know various people involved and so on and so you know it works for basic science and it's like we can do more of this and so if knowledge in chemistry said it's become an Institute,
yes well it needs to become an instant an official institution right but the thing that's I was thinking about okay so what do we do with complexity.
You know what what they're all these people who've you know what should happen to that field and what I realized is
that's kind of this area foundations of complexity that's about,
these questions about simple programs what they do that's far away from a bunch of the detail applications that people it's not far away it's the it's the under you know the Bedrock underneath those applications,
so I realized recently this is my recent kind of little innovation of a sort.
Um a post that I'll do very soon the about kind of you know the foundations of complexity
what really are they I think they're really two ideas to conceptual ideas that I hadn't really enunciated I think before one is what I call metamodeling the other is really ology
so what is metamodeling so matter modeling is you've got this complicated model and it's a model of you know hedgehogs interacting with this interacting with that.
And the question is what's really underneath that what is it.
Is it a turing machine is that a cellular automaton you know what is the underlying stuff underneath that model and so there's this kind of meta Science question of given these models what is the core model.
And I realized I mean to me that's an obvious question but then I realized I've been doing language design for 40 years and language design is exactly that question,
you know underneath all of this detailed stuff people do what are the underlying premises and that's a question people haven't tended to ask about models they say well we've got this nice model for this and that and the other
what's really underneath it and what
you know because once you have the thing that's underneath it well for example this multi computation idea is an ultimate metamodeling idea because it's saying underneath all these fields,
is one kind of paradigmatic structure and you know you can you can imagine the same kind of thing that much more sort of.
Much sort of shallower levels and in different kinds of modeling so there's the first activity is this kind of metamodeling the kind of the
the models about models so to speak you know what is the what's what's you know drilling down into models that's one thing
the other thing is this this thing that I think we're going to call really ology which is kind of the okay you've got these simple rules you've got cellular automata you've got turning machines you've got substitution systems you've got register machines got all these different things what do they actually do in the wild.
And this is an area that I've spent a lot of time you know working on it's a lot of stuff in my new kind of science book is about this you know this new book I wrote about combinator's is is full of stuff like this
and and this journal complex systems is has lots of papers about these kinds of things but.
There isn't really a home for people who do really ology or what I'm not as you called the basic science of rules yes yes right so it's like
you've got some what is it is it mathematics know it isn't really like mathematics in fact from my now understanding of matter mathematics I understand that it's the molecular Dynamics level it's not the level that mathematicians have traditionally cared about it's not computer science
because computer science is about writing programs that do things you know that work for a purpose not programs in the wild so to speak.
It's not physics it doesn't have anything to do with you know maybe underneath some Physics but it's not physics as such so it just hasn't had a home and if you look at.
You know but what's great about it is it's a surviving field so to speak it's something where you know one of the things I find sort of inspiring
about mathematics for example is you look at mathematics that was done you know in ancient Greece ancient you know Babylon Egypt and so on it's still here today you know you find an icosahedron that somebody made,
in ancient Egypt you look at it oh that's a very modern thing it's an icosahedron you know it's a Timeless kind of kind of activity.
And this idea of studying simple rules and what they do it's a Timeless activity and I can see that over the last 40 years or so.
As you know even when cellular automata it's kind of like you know you can sort of catalog what are the different salad or am used.
And you know like the the simplest rules like one you might even know this one rule 184 it's rule 184 is a minimum model for road traffic.
And you know it's also a minimum model for various other things but it's kind of fun that you can literally say you know rule 90 as a minimum model for this and this and this.
Rule for as a mental model for this and it's kind of remarkable that you can just buy in this Roar level of this kind of study of rules.
They then branch that are the raw material
that you can use to make models of different things so it's a it's a very pure basic science but it's one that you know people have explored it but they've been kind of a little bit in the wilderness,
and I think you know one of the things that I would like to do finally is you know I always thought that sort of this notion of pure and KS pure band and gasping the acronym for my book new kind of science was.
It was something that people should be doing and you know we tried to figure out what's the right institutional structure to do this stuff you know we dealt with a bunch of universities oh you know can we do this here
well what department would be in it well it isn't in a department it's so new kind of thing that's why that's why the book was called a new kind of science its kind of the the because that's an increasingly good description of what it is so to speak.
We're actually work we were thinking about kind of the rule illogical Society because we're realizing that it's kind of lower it's some you know there's a there's it's very it's very interesting I mean I've never really done something like this before because there's this whole group of researchers.
Who who've been doing things that are really.
In some cases very elegant very surviving very solid you know here's this thing that happens in this very abstract system.
But it's like it's like what is that part of you know it doesn't have a home.
And I think that's something I you know I kind of felt myself for not having been more you know when complexity was developing in the 80s I didn't understand.
The the the danger of applications that is it's really cool that you can apply the stick anomic so you can apply it to evolutionary biology and this and that and the other.
What happens with applications is everything that sucked into the applications and the pure stuff it's like the pure mathematics there isn't any pure mathematics so to speak it's all just applications of mathematics.
And I failed to kind of make sure that this kind of pure area.
Was was kind of maintained and developed and I think now you know one of the things I want to try to do and you know it's a funny thing because I'm used to look I've been a.
Text CEO for more than half my life now so,
you know this is what I know how to do and you know I can I can make stuff happen and get projects to happen even as it turns out basic science.
In that kind of setting and how that translates into kind of you know there a lot of people working on for example a physics project sort of distributed through the academic world and that's working just great but the question is you know can we have,
a sort of accelerator mechanism that makes use of kind of what we've learnt in sort of R&D Innovation and you know but on the other hand it's a funny thing because
you know in a company in the end
the thing is you know it's a company that makes products that sell things sells things to people in you know when you're doing basic research one of the challenges is there isn't that same kind of sort of mechanism
and so it's you know how do you drive the thing in a kind of an alleged kind of way so that it really can make forward progress rather than.
You know what can often happen in oh and academic settings where it's like well they're all these flowers blooming but it's not clear.
That the that it's the active essential Mission and the drive just like you do with the company that's delivering a big overarching product and rights that's but the challenges you know when you have a the the economics of the world.
A such that
you know when you're delivering a product to people say wow that's useful will buy it and then that kind of feeds back and okay then you can then you can pay the people who build it to eat you know so they can eat and so on and with basic science the the payoff.
Is very much less visible and you know with the physics project is to say the big surprise has been that I mean you know.
For example well the big surprise was a physics project is.
That it's looks like it has near-term applications and I was like I'm guessing this 200 years away it's um I was kind of using the analogy of you know Newton starting a satellite launch company.
Which would have been kind of wrong time.
Um and you know but it turns out that's not the case but but we can't guarantee that and if you say we're signing up to do basic research basic really ology let's say and,
you know
and we can't we don't know the Horizon you know it's an unknown Horizon it's kind of like an undecidable kind of proposition of when is this proof going to end so to speak when is it going to be something that they get supplied.
Wow I hope this is this becomes a vibrant New Field of really ology I love it like I told you many many times it's one of
the most amazing ideas that has been brought to this world so I hope you get a bunch of people to explore this world.
Thank you once again for spending your really valuable time with me today fun stuff thank you.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Stephen Wolfram to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words from Richard feinman nature uses only the longest threads to weave her patterns.
Each small piece of our fabric reveals the organization of the entire tapestry
thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
Music.